zPROBE: Zero Peek Robustness Checks for Federated Learning
Zahra Ghodsi1 *, Mojan Javaheripi2∗ , Nojan Sheybani2∗ , Xinqiao Zhang2∗ ,
Ke Huang3 , Farinaz Koushanfar2
1
2
Purdue University, University of California San Diego, 3 San Diego State University
1

arXiv:2206.12100v3 [cs.LG] 5 Sep 2023

2

zahra@purdue.edu

{mojan, nsheyban, x5zhang, farinaz}@ucsd.edu
3

khuang@sdsu.edu

Abstract
Privacy-preserving federated learning allows multiple
users to jointly train a model with coordination of a central
server. The server only learns the final aggregation result,
thereby preventing leakage of the users’ (private) training
data from the individual model updates. However, keeping the individual updates private allows malicious users
to degrade the model accuracy without being detected, also
known as Byzantine attacks. Best existing defenses against
Byzantine workers rely on robust rank-based statistics, e.g.,
setting robust bounds via the median of updates, to find malicious updates. However, implementing privacy-preserving
rank-based statistics, especially median-based, is nontrivial
and unscalable in the secure domain, as it requires sorting of
all individual updates. We establish the first private robustness check that uses high break point rank-based statistics
on aggregated model updates. By exploiting randomized
clustering, we significantly improve the scalability of our
defense without compromising privacy. We leverage the
derived statistical bounds in zero-knowledge proofs to detect and remove malicious updates without revealing the
private user updates. Our novel framework, zPROBE, enables Byzantine resilient and secure federated learning. We
show the effectiveness of zPROBE on several computer vision benchmarks. Empirical evaluations demonstrate that
zPROBE provides a low overhead solution to defend against
state-of-the-art Byzantine attacks while preserving privacy.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) has emerged as a popular
paradigm for training a central model on a dataset distributed
amongst many parties, by sending model updates and without requiring the parties to share their data. However, model
* Equal contribution

updates in FL can be exploited by adversaries to infer properties of the users’ private training data [28]. This lack of
privacy prohibits the use of FL in many machine learning
applications that involve sensitive data such as healthcare
information [31, 44] or financial transactions [45]. As such,
existing FL schemes are augmented with privacy-preserving
guarantees. Recent work propose secure aggregation protocols using cryptography [6, 3, 35]. In these protocols, the
server does not learn individual user updates, but only a final
aggregate with contribution from several users. Hiding individual updates from the server opens a large attack surface
for malicious clients to send invalid updates that compromise
the integrity of distributed training.
Byzantine attacks on FL are carried out by malicious
clients who manipulate their local updates to degrade
the model performance [13, 4, 2]. Popular high-fidelity
Byzantine-robust aggregation rules rely on rank-based statistics, e.g., trimmed mean [46, 43], median [46], mean around
median [42, 7], and geometric median [9, 21, 42]. These
schemes require sorting of the individual model updates
across users. As such, using them in secure FL is nontrivial
and unscalable to large number of users since the central
server cannot access the (plaintext) value of user updates.
In this work we address aforementioned challenges and
provide high break point Byzantine tolerance using rankbased statistics while preserving privacy. We propose a
median-based robustness check that derives a threshold for
acceptable model updates using securely computed mean
over random user clusters. Our thresholds are dynamic and
automatically change based on the distribution of the gradients. Notably, we do not need access to individual user
updates or public datasets to establish our defense. We leverage the computed thresholds to identify and filter malicious
users in a privacy-preserving manner. Our Byzantine-robust
framework, zPROBE, incorporates carefully crafted zeroknowledge proofs [39, 40] to check user behavior and identify possible malicious actions, including sending Byzantine

updates or deviating from the secure aggregation protocol.
As such, zPROBE guarantees correct and consistent behavior
in the challenging malicious threat model.
We incorporate probabilistic optimizations in the design
of zPROBE to minimize the overhead of our zero-knowledge
checks, without compromising security. By co-designing
the robustness defense and cryptographic components of
zPROBE, we are able to provide a scalable and low overhead solution for private and robust FL. Our construction
is the first of its kind with cost that grows sub-linearly with
respect to the number of clients. zPROBE performs an aggregation round on ResNet20 over CIFAR-10 with only
sub-second client compute time. In this work we show the
performance of zPROBE on three foundational computer
vision benchmarks, while also highlighting the scalability
of our framework to larger benchmarks. In summary, our
contributions are:
• Developing a novel privacy-preserving robustness
check based on rank-based statistics. zPROBE is robust against various Byzantine attacks with 0.5 − 2.8%
higher accuracy compared to prior work on private and
robust FL.
• Enabling private and robust aggregation in the malicious threat model by incorporating zero-knowledge
proofs. Our Byzantine-robust secure aggregation, for
the first time, scales sub-linearly with respect to number
of clients.
• Leveraging probabilistic optimizations to reduce
zPROBE overhead without compromising security, resulting in orders of magnitude client runtime reduction.

2. Cryptographic Primitives
Shamir Secret Sharing [32] is a method to distribute a
secret s between n parties such that any t shares can be used
to reconstruct s, but any set of t − 1 or fewer shares reveal
no information about the secret. Shamir’s scheme picks a
random (t − 1)-degree polynomial P such that P (0) = s.
The shares are then created as (i, P (i)), i ∈ {1, ..., n}. With
t shares, Lagrange Interpolation can be used to reconstruct
the polynomial and obtain the secret.
Zero-Knowledge Proof (ZKP) is a cryptographic primitive between two parties, a prover P and a verifier V, which
allows P to convince V that a computation on P’s private
inputs is correct without revealing the inputs. We use the
Wolverine protocol [39] with highly efficient P in terms of
runtime, memory usage, and communication. In Wolverine,
value x known by P can be authenticated using informationtheoretic message authentication codes (IT-MACs) [14] as
follows: assume ∆ is a global key sampled uniformly and is
known only to V. V is given a uniform key K[x] and P is
given the corresponding MAC tag M [x] = K[x] + ∆.x. An

authenticated value can be opened (verified) by P sending
?
x and M [x] to V to check whether M [x] = K[x] + ∆.x.
Wolverine represents the computation as an arithmetic or
Boolean circuit, for which the secret wire values are authenticated as described. The circuit is evaluated jointly by P
and V, at the end of which P opens the output indicating the
proof correctness.
Secure FL Aggregation includes a server and n clients
each holding a private vector of model updates with l parameters
u ∈ Rl . The server wishes to obtain the aggregate
Pn
i=1 ui without learning any of the individual client updates. [6] and follow up [3] propose a secure aggregation
protocol using low-overhead cryptographic primitives such
as one-time pads. Each pair of clients (i, j) agree on a random vector mi,j . User i adds mi,j to their input, and user
j subtracts it from their input so the masks cancel out when
aggregated. To ensure privacy in case of dropout or network
delays, each user adds an additional random mask ri . Users
then create t-out-of-n Shamir shares of their masks and share
them with other clients. User i computes their masked input
as follows:
X
X
vi = ui + ri −
mi,j +
mi,j
(1)
0<j<i

i<j≤n

Once the server receives all masked inputs, it asks for shares
of pairwise masks for dropped users and shares of individual
masks for surviving users (but never both) to reconstruct
the aggregate value. The construction in [3] builds over [6]
and improves the client runtime complexity to logarithmic
scale rather than linear with respect to the number of clients.
Note that the secure aggregation of [3, 6] assumes the clients
are semi-honest and do not deviate from the protocol. However, these assumptions are not suitable for our threat model
which involves malicious clients. We propose an aggregation
protocol that benefits from speedups in [3] and is augmented
with zero-knowledge proofs for the challenging malicious
setting as described below.

3. Methodology
Threat Model. We aim to protect the privacy of individual client updates as they leak information about clients’
private training data. No party should learn any information about a client’s update other than the contribution to an
aggregate value with inputs from a large number of other
clients. We also aim to protect the central model against
Byzantine attacks, i.e., when a malicious client sends invalid
updates to degrade the model performance. We consider a
semi-honest server that follows the protocol but may try to
learn more information from the received data. We assume
a portion of clients are malicious, i.e., arbitrarily deviating
from the protocol, or sending erroneous updates to cause
divergence in the central model. Notably, we assume the

(a) Step 1: The server randomly clusters the
users, obtains cluster means µi , and computes
the median of cluster means (µi s).

(b) Step 2: Each client provides a ZKP attesting
that their update is within the threshold from
the median of cluster means.

(c) Step 3: Clients marked as benign participate
in a final round of secure aggregation and the
server obtains the result.

Figure 1: High level description of zPROBE robust and private aggregation.

Algorithm 1 zPROBE secure aggregation
Input: Shamir threshold value t, clients set U
Round 1: Mask Generation
client i: Generate key pair (ski , pki ), sample bi
ai,j ← KeyAgreement(ski , pkj )
mi,j ← PRG(ai,j ), ri ← PRG(bi )
b
{ssk
j }j∈U , ← SS(ski , t), {sj }j∈U ← SS(bi , t)
sk
b
Send sj , sj to client j
Round 2: Update MaskingX
X
client i: vi ← ui + ri −
mi,j +
mi,j
0<j<i

i<j≤U

Authenticate ui and send vi to server
Perform correctness check in Alg 2
server: Sample q indices Si (Sec. 3.4) for client i
Perform correctness check in Alg 2
Round 3: Aggregate Unmasking
server: Ud ← dropped clients, Us ← surviving clients
sk
Collect tX
shares of {s
{sbi }i∈Us
i }i∈Ud and
X
X
Agg ←
vi −
ri +
mi,j
i∈Us

i∈Us

i∈Us ,j∈Ud

clients may: 1 perform Byzantine attacks by changing the
value of their model update to degrade central model performance, 2 use inconsistent update values in different steps
of the secure aggregation protocol, 3 perform the masked
update computation in Eq. 1 incorrectly or with wrong values, and 4 use incorrect seed values in generating masks
and shares. To the best of our knowledge, zPROBE is the
first single-server framework with malicious clients that is
resilient against such an extensive attack surface, supports
client dropouts, and does not require a public clean dataset.

3.1. zPROBE Overview
zPROBE comprises two main components, namely, secure aggregation, and robustness establishment. We propose
a new secure aggregation protocol for malicious clients in
Sec. 3.2. Our proposed method to establish robustness is detailed in Sec. 3.3. We design an adaptive Byzantine defense
that finds the dynamic range of acceptable model updates

Algorithm 2 Circuit for zPROBE correctness check
Client input: bi , ai,j , authenticated ui
Public input: vi , indices set Si , clients set U
check = 1
for k in Si
r̂ik ← PRGk (bi )
for j in U
m̂ki,j ← PRGk (ai,j )
X
X
k
v̂i ← uki + r̂ik −
m̂ki,j +
m̂ki,j
0<j<i

i<j≤n

check = check ∧ (v̂ik = vik )
return check

Algorithm 3 Circuit for zPROBE robustness check
Client input: Authenticated ui
Public input: λ, θ, indices set Si
check = 1
for k in Si
check = check ∧ (|uki − λk | < θk )
return check

per iteration. Using the derived bounds, we perform a secure
range check on client updates to filter Byzantine attackers.
Our robustness check is privacy-preserving and highly scalable.
The proposed robust and private aggregation is performed
in three steps as illustrated in Fig. 1. First the server clusters
the clients randomly into c clusters. Each cluster cj then
performs zPROBE’s secure aggregation protocol. The server
obtains the aggregate value αj and the mean µj = αj /|cj |
for each cluster in plaintext. In the second step, the server
uses the median λ of all cluster means to compute a threshold
θ for model updates. The values of median λ and threshold
θ are public, and broadcasted by the server to all clients.
Each client i then provides a zero-knowledge proof attesting
that their update is within the threshold from the median,
i.e., abs(ui − λ) < θ. This ensures that clients are not
performing Byzantine attacks on the central model (item 1
in threat model). Users that fail to provide the proof are
considered malicious and treated as dropped. The remaining

users participate in a round of zPROBE secure aggregation
and the server obtains the final aggregate result.

3.2. zPROBE Secure Aggregation
Alg. 1 shows the detailed steps for zPROBE’s secure aggregation for n clients consisting of three rounds. In round
1, each client i generates a key pair (ski , pki ), samples a
random seed bi , and performs a key agreement protocol [15]
with client j to obtain a shared seed ai,j . The seeds are used
to generate individual and pairwise masks using a pseudorandom generator (PRG). Each client then creates t-out-of-n
Shamir shares (SS) of ski and bi , and sends one share of
each to every other client.
In the second round, each client uses the masks generated
in round one to compute masked updates according to Eq. 1,
which are then sent to the server. All clients perform the
ZKP authentication protocol described in Sec. 2 on their
update. This ensures that clients use consistent update values
across different steps (item 2 in threat model). In addition,
each client proves, in zero-knowledge, that their sent value
vi is correctly computed as shown in Alg. 2. Specifically,
the circuit that is evaluated in zero-knowledge expands the
generated seeds to masks, and computes the masked update
using Eq. 1. The value of check is then opened by the client,
and the server verifies that check = 1. This ensures that the
masks are correctly generated from seeds, and the masked
update is correctly computed (item 3 in the threat model).
Users that fail to provide the proof are dropped in the next
round and their update is not incorporated in aggregation.
We introduce optimizations in Sec 3.4 that allow the
server to derive a bound q, for the number of model updates
to be checked, such that the probability of detecting Byzantine updates is higher than a predefined rate. The server
samples q random parameters from client i, and performs
the update correctness check (Alg. 2). We note that clients
are not motivated to modify the seeds for creating masks,
since this results in uncontrollable, out-of-bound errors that
can be easily detected by the server (item 4 in threat model).
We discuss the effect of using wrong seeds in Appendix A.
In round 3, the server performs unmasking by asking for
shares of ski for dropped users and shares of bi for surviving
users, which are then used to reconstruct the pairwise and individual masks for dropped and surviving users respectively.
The server is then able to obtain the aggregate result.

3.3. Establishing Robustness
Deriving Dynamic Bounds. To identify the malicious
gradient updates, we adaptively find the valid range for acceptable gradients per iteration. In this context, acceptable
gradients are those that do not harm the central model’s
convergence when included in the gradient aggregation. To
successfully identify such gradients, we rely on the underlying assumption that benign model updates are in the majority

while harmful Byzantine updates form a minority of outlier
values. In the presence of outliers, the median can serve as a
reliable baseline for in-distribution values [7].
In the secure FL setup, the true value of the individual user
updates is not revealed to the server. Calculating the median
on the masked user updates is therefore nontrivial since it
requires sorting the values which incurs extremely high overheads in secure domain. We circumvent this challenge by
forming clusters of users, where our secure aggregation can
be used to efficiently compute the average of their updates.
The secure aggregation abstracts out the user’s individual
updates, but reveals the final mean value for each cluster
{µ1 , µ2 , . . . , µc } to the server. The server can thus easily
compute the median (λ) on the mean of clusters in plaintext.
Using the Central Limit Theorem for Sums, cluster means
follow a normal distribution µi ∼ N (µ, √1n σ) where µ
c
and σ denote the mean and standard deviation of the original
model updates and nc is the cluster size. We can thus use the
standard deviation of the cluster means (σµ ) as a distance
metric for marking outlier updates. The distance is measured
from the median of means λ, which serves as an acceptable model update drawn from N (µ, √1n σ). For a given
c
update ui , we investigate Byzantine behavior by checking
η
|ui −λ| < θ, where θ = η.σµ = √n σ. The value of η can
c
be tuned based on cluster size (nc ) and the desired statistical
bounds on the distance in terms of the standard deviation of
model updates (σ). Specifically, assuming a higher bound
on the portion of malicious users ϕmax , the server can automatically adjust η such that at most (1 − ϕmax ) · n of the
users are marked as benign where n is the total user count.
Secure Robustness Check. We use ZKPs to identify malicious clients that send invalid updates, without compromising clients’ privacy. Our ZKP relies on the robustness
metrics derived in Sec. 3.3, i.e., the median of cluster means
λ and the threshold θ. Clients (P) prove to the server (V)
that their updates comply with the robustness range check.
During the aggregation round in step 1, clients authenticate their private updates, and the authenticated value is
used in steps 2 and 3. This ensures that consistent values
are used across steps and clients can not change their update
after learning λ and θ to fit in the robustness threshold. In
step 2, the server makes λ and θ public. Inside ZKP, the
clients’ updates ui are used in a Boolean circuit determining if |ui − λ| < θ as outlined in Alg. 3. Invalid model
updates that fail the range check are dropped from the final
aggregation round.

3.4. Probabilistic Optimizations
This section provides statistical bounds on the number
of required checks to accurately detect malicious clients.
Using the derived bounds, we optimize our framework for
minimum overhead, thereby ensuring scalability to large
models.

5 8

15

LeNet5 architecture with 60K parameters. Finally, to showcase the scalability of our approach, we evaluate ResNet20 [22] with 273K parameters trained on the CIFAR-10
dataset [25] which is among the biggest benchmarks studied in the secure FL literature [8, 10]. Table 2 encloses the
training hyperparameters for all models.

51

Benchmark

Figure 2: Detection probability vs. number of ZKP checks
(q). Vertical lines mark the required q values for 99.5%
detection rate.

MNIST (IID) + LeNet5
MNIST (non-IID) + LeNet5
F-MNIST (IID) + LeNet5
CIFAR-10 (IID) + ResNet-20

# Clients

LR

# Epochs

Batch size (per user)

50
25
50
50

0.01
0.01
0.01
0.05

500
500
500
500

12800 (256)
800 (32)
12800 (256)†
12800 (256)

† When varying the number of clients, we keep the total batch size as 12800

and scale the per user batch size accordingly.

Malicious clients can compromise their update, by sending updates with distance margins larger than the tolerable
threshold θ, or sending incorrect masked updates (Eq. 1). Assume that a portion of model updates Sm , are compromised.
The probability of detecting a malicious update is equivalent
to finding at least one compromised parameter gradient:



  
l · (1 − Sm ) . l
p=1−
,
q
q

(2)

where l is the total model parameter updates, and q denotes
the number of per-user ZKP checks on model updates. The
above formulation confirms that it is indeed not necessary
to perform ZKP checks on all parameter updates within the
model. Rather, q can be easily computed via Eq. 2, such that
the probability of detecting a compromised update is higher
than a predefined rate: p > 1−δ. Fig. 2 shows the probability
of detecting malicious users versus number of ZKP checks
for a model with l = 60K parameters. As seen, zPROBE
guarantees a failure rate lower than δ = 0.005 with very few
ZKP checks. Note that malicious users are incentivized to
attack a high portion of updates to increase their effect on the
aggregated model’s accuracy. We leverage Eq. 2 to derive
the required number of correctness and robustness checks as
described in Alg. 2 and Alg. 3. For each check, the server
computes the bound q, then samples q random indices from
model parameters for each client. The clients then provide
ZKPs for the selected set of parameter indices.

4. Experiments
4.1. Experimental Setup
We now provide details about the benchmarked models,
datasets, and defense implementation.
Dataset and Models. We consider three benchmarks
commonly studied by prior work in secure FL. Our first
benchmark is a variant of LeNet5 [27] trained on the MNIST
dataset [26], with 2 convolution and 3 fully-connected layers, totaling 42K parameters. Our second benchmark is
the Fashion-MNIST (F-MNIST) dataset [41] trained on the

Table 2: Training hyperparameters.
Implementation and Configuration. zPROBE defense
is implemented in Python and integrated in PyTorch to enable model training. We use the EMP-Toolkit [38] for implementation of zero-knowledge proofs. We run all experiments
on a 128GB RAM, AMD Ryzen 3990X CPU desktop. All
reported runtimes are averaged over 100 trials.
Byzantine Attacks. We assume 25% of the clients are
Byzantine, which is a common assumption in the literature [2]. Malicious users alter a portion Sm of benign model
updates and masks according to a Byzantine attack scenario.
We show the effectiveness of our robustness checks against
three commonly used Byzantine attacks. Here Um denotes
the malicious updates, where |Um | = Sm · l and l is the total
number of model updates.
• Sign Flip [13]. Malicious client flips the sign of the
update: u = −κ.u, κ > 0 (∀u ∈ Um )
• Scaling [4]. Malicious client scales the local gradients
to increase the influence on the global model: u =
κ.u, κ > 0 (∀u ∈ Um )
• Non-omniscient attack [2]. Malicious clients construct
their Byzantine update by adding a scaled Gaussian
noise to their original update with mean µ and standard
deviation σ: u = µ − κ.σ (∀u ∈ Um )
Baseline Defenses. We present comparisons with prior
work on robust and private FL, i.e., BREA [34] and EIFFeL [10]. While zPROBE is able to implement popular
defenses based on rank-based statistics, EIFFeL is limited to
static thresholds and requires access to clean public datasets.
BREA implements multi-Krum [12], but leaks pairwise distances of clients to the server. zPROBE achieves lower computation complexity compared to both works and higher
accuracy1 compared to EIFFeL. We also benchmark a commonly used aggregator which uses only the median of cluster
1 Raw accuracy numbers are not reported for BREA, therefore, direct
comparison is not possible.

(a) M NIST + Sign Flip

(b) FM NIST + Non-om niscient

(c) CIFAR-10 + Scaling

Figure 3: Test accuracy vs. FL training epochs for different attacks and
benchmarks. Each plot shows the benign training (green), Byzantine training
without defense (maroon), and Byzantine training with zPROBE defense.
means, and show that it results in drastic loss of accuracy
compared to zPROBE. Additionally, we evaluate zPROBE
when the training data is non-IID and show our adaptive
bounds outperform the state-of-the-art defense in [24]2 .

Aggregator

IID

non-IID

AVG
KRUM
CM
CClip
RFA
zPROBE

93.2 ± 0.2
91.6 ± 0.3
91.9 ± 0.2
93.0 ± 0.2
93.2 ± 0.2
99.0 ± 0.0

92.7 ± 0.3
53.1 ± 3.9
78.6 ± 3.1
91.2 ± 0.5
92.6 ± 0.2
98.6 ± 0.4

Table 1: zPROBE and previous robust
FL aggregators for non-IID data, accuracy reported across 10 runs.

we believe can be attributed to 1) the use of rank-based statistics to establish dynamic thresholds, and 2) the use of all
benign gradients in the aggregation, rather than replacing all
values with a robust aggregator, e.g., as in KRUM.

4.2. Defense Performance
IID Training Data. We evaluate zPROBE on various
benchmarks using n = 50 clients picked for a training round,
randomly grouped into c = 7 clusters. In Section 5.1 we
present evaluations with different number of clients between
30 and 200. Consistent with prior work [2], we assume malicious users compromise all model updates to maximize the
degradation of the central model’s accuracy. Fig. 3 demonstrates the convergence behavior of the FL scheme in the
presence of Byzantine users with and without zPROBE defense. As seen, zPROBE successfully eliminates the effect
of malicious model updates and recovers the ground-truth accuracy. We show evaluations of zPROBE accuracy on other
variants of the dataset and attack in Fig. 10 in Appendix D.
On the MNIST benchmark, the byzantine attacks cause
the central model’s accuracy to reduce to nearly random
guess (10.2%-11.2%), without any defense. zPROBE successfully thwarts the malicious updates, recovering benign
accuracy within 0.0%-0.6% margin. On F-MNIST, we recover the original ∼ 88% drop of accuracy caused by the
attacks to 0%-2% drop. Finally, on CIFAR-10, the gap between benign training and the attacked model is reduced
from 45%- 90% to only 3%-7%. Compared to EIFFeL [10],
zPROBE achieves 1.2%, 0.5%, and 2.8% higher accuracy
when evaluated on the same attack applied to MNIST, FMNIST, and CIFAR-10, respectively.
Non-IID Training Data. Most recently, [24] show user
clustering over existing robust aggregation methods can
adapt them to heterogeneous (non-IID) data. We follow
their training setup and hyperparameters to distribute the
MNIST dataset unevenly across 25 users. As shown in Tab. 1,
zPROBE defense outperforms the accuracies obtained by the
various defenses evaluated in [24]. This performance boost
2 Note that this work focuses on plaintext robust training and does not

provide secure aggregation.

4.3. Runtime and Complexity Analysis
Tab. 3 summarizes the total runtime for clients in
zPROBE for one round of federated training with n = 50,
c = 7, and Sm = 0.3 across different benchmarks. We
use the secure aggregation protocol of [3] as our baseline,
which does not provide security against malicious clients or
robustness against Byzantine attacks.

Dataset

Baseline
(ms)

zPROBE
(ms)

MNIST
F-MNIST
CIFAR-10

208.0
214.4
231.2

444.7
452.9
461.2

Table 3: zPROBE runtime vs. the baseline secure aggregation of [3] with no support for Byzantine clients.

Tab. 4 summarizes the runtime of zPROBE versus the portion of attacked model updates. By decreasing Sm , zPROBE
requires more checks to detect the outlier gradients as outlined in Eq. 2. Nevertheless, due to the optimizations in
zPROBE robustness and correctness checks, we are still able
to maintain sub-second runtime and sublinear growth with
respect to number of ZKP checks necessary.

# ZKP Checks
zPROBE Runtime (ms)

0.1

0.3

Sm
0.5

0.7

1.0

51
777.9

15
452.9

8
372.6

5
349.6

1
316.5

Table 4: zPROBE performance for LeNet5 on F-MNIST vs.
the portion of Byzantine model updates (Sm ).

5. Effect of Number of Clients on zPROBE Runtime
Table 5 shows the effect of increasing the number of
clients on the performance on zPROBE. For these experiments, results are gathered on the F-MNIST dataset, with
c = 7 and |Sm | = 0.3. As seen, although exceeding the
sub-second performance as the number of clients scales up,
zPROBE maintains sublinear growth in runtime with respect
to number of clients.
# Clients

zPROBE Runtime (ms)

30
40
50
70
100
200

298.4
369.7
452.9
598.8
828.6
1620.4

plexity of client compute is therefore O(log2 n + l · log n).
• Server. The server computation consist of reconstructing
t-out-of-k shamir shares with O(n · k 2 ), generating pairwise
masks for dropped out clients with O(n · k · l), performing
correctness checks of Alg. 2 with O(n · l), and performing
robustness checks of Alg. 3 with O(n · l). The overall complexity of server compute is thus O(n · log2 n + n · l · log n).
We are unable to directly compare zPROBE’s runtime
numbers with previous private and robust FL methods since
their implementations are not publicly available. Instead,
Tab. 6 presents a complexity comparison between zPROBE,
BREA [34], and EIFFeL [10] with respect to number of
clients n (with k = log n), model size l, and number of
malicious clients m. zPROBE enjoys a lower computational complexity compared to both prior art for client and
server. Specifically, the client runtime is quadratic and linear
with number of clients in BREA and EIFFeL respectively,
whereas logarithmic in zPROBE.

Table 5: Runtime of zPROBE over varying number of clients
Client

In Tab. 3, we can see that as the underlying model
gets much larger (growing ∼ 4× in size from the MNIST
to CIFAR-10 tasks) zPROBE overhead grows a negligible
amount. This is a strong indicator of the scalability of our
proposed secure aggregation. Alongside this, the probabilistic optimizations explained in Sec. 3.4 become more
beneficial as the model size increases. Compared to a naive
implementation where 1 − Sm parameters are checked, we
achieve a speedup of 3 orders of magnitude in client and
server runtime.
We also provide the detailed breakdown of the runtime
for various components of zPROBE in Fig. 5. Results are
gathered on CIFAR-10 dataset and ResNet-20 architecture
with n = 50, c = 7, and Sm = 0.3. Step 2 has very low overhead, even when only 30% of model updates are Byzantine,
which requires more checks. The most significant operation
in terms of percent increase from baseline is observed in
Step 3 (R2), where the correctness of masked updates are
checked (Alg. 1 Round 2 and Alg. 2). zPROBE enjoys a low
communication overhead as well, requiring only 2.1MB and
4.4MB of client and server communication respectively, for
a round of aggregation over CIFAR-10. Overall, with subsecond performance on all benchmarks examined, zPROBE
provides an efficient full privacy-preserving and robust solution for FL.
zPROBE Complexity. In this section we present the
complexity analysis of zPROBE runtime with respect to
number of clients n (with k = log n) and model size l.
• Client: Each client computation consists of performing key agreements with O(k), generating pairwise masks
with O(k · l), creating t-out-of-k Shamir shares with O(k 2 ),
performing correctness checks of Alg. 2 with O(k · l), and
performing robustness checks of Alg. 3 with O(l). The com-

BREA
EIFFeL
zPROBE

2

Server
2

O(n l + nlk )
O(mnl)
O(k 2 + kl)

O((n3 + nl)k 2 · log(k))
O((n + l)nk 2 · log(k) + m.l. min(n, m2 ))
O(nk 2 + nlk)

Table 6: Runtime complexity of zPROBE vs. prior works
BREA [34] and EIFFeL [10].

5.1. Discussion
We perform a sensitivity analysis to various attack parameters and FL configurations on F-MNIST. Number of clients
is set to n = 50 with c = 7 clusters, unless otherwise noted.
Sign flip attack [13] is applied to all model updates with
κ = 5. As shown, zPROBE is largely robust to changes in
the underlying attack or training configuration, consistently
recovering the central models’ accuracy.
Portion of Compromised Updates Sm . We vary the portion of Byzantine model updates (Sm ) and show the accuracy
of the central model with and without zPROBE robustness
checks in Fig. 4(a). Even when only a small portion of model
updates are malicious, zPROBE’s outlier detection can successfully recover the accuracy from random guess (10%) to
97.9%. To worsen the central model’s accuracy, Byzantine
workers are incentivized to attack a high number of model
updates. Attacking all model updates results in a 89.7% drop
of accuracy when no defense is present. However, even when
all model updates are compromised, zPROBE recovers the
central model’s accuracy with less than 0.5% error margin.
Attack Magnitude. We control the magnitude of the perturbation applied to model updates by changing the parameter κ in various Byzantine attack scenarios. Fig. 4(b) shows
the effect of the attack magnitude on the central model’s
accuracy and zPROBE’s defense performance. As seen, a

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 4: Ablation studies on zPROBE defense performance with varying (a) portion of compromised gradients, (b) attack
magnitude, (c) number of clients, and (d) number of user clusters. The dashed line in (a), (b) corresponds to the highest test
accuracy obtained during training when no defense is applied.

S1 (R1)
S1 (R2)
S2
S3 (R1)
S3 (R2)

Baseline
zPROBE
0

100

200

300

Client Runtime (ms)

400

Figure 5: Runtime breakdown for CIFAR-10, corresponding
to rounds (R) from Alg. 1 and steps (S) from Fig. 1.
higher perturbation is easier to detect using our medianbased robustness check. The Byzantine attack can cause
an accuracy drop of ∼ 88% when no robustness check is
applied. However, zPROBE can largely recover the accuracy
degradation, reducing the accuracy loss to 0.2%-9.8%.
Aggregation Strategy. Recall from Fig. 1 that zPROBE
uses the median of per-cluster means (in plaintext) to extract
a threshold, which is then used in step 2 to filter out malicious
clients. Rather than performing steps 2 and 3 of zPROBE,
an alternative robust aggregation rule may directly use the
median value to update the global model. Merely using the
median for the final aggregation ignores beneficial updates
by benign users. This leads to a drastic accuracy degradation
of 28.6% compared to zPROBE which includes all gradients
that pass the threshold. A comparison between median-based
aggregation and zPROBE is presented in Appendix B, Fig. 8.
Number of Clients (n). Fig. 4(c) shows the convergence
of zPROBE during training for various n ∈ [30, 200]. We
note that n is the subset of clients which are picked for an
aggregation round. We pick this range according to practical
deployments of FL where the server picks a small fraction
of all FL clients for each aggregation round [33]. As seen,
client count does not affect zPROBE convergence and the
central model’s final accuracy. Specifically, zPROBE can
scale to n = 200, which is among the largest studied user
counts in robust and private FL.
Number of Clusters (c). Fig. 4(d) shows the effect
of number of clusters on accuracy. The performance of

zPROBE is largely independent of the number of clusters,
showing less than 0.18% variation for different c while the
increase in latency is less than 8%. The number of clusters can therefore be selected freely such that user privacy
is ensured. Recall from Fig. 1 that cluster means in step 1
of zPROBE are revealed to the server. To analyze the privacy implications, we rely on the contemporary literature
in model/gradient inversion which show that increasing the
batch size, or equivalently number of users, (> 100 [19] or
> 48 [47]) reduces the effectiveness of such attacks.
We benchmark the SOTA attack by [19] to reconstruct
user data from the aggregate. We use a small 4-layer model
and a batch size of 10 to benefit the attacker. Fig. 9(a),(b)
in Appendix C show the efficacy of the inversion attack as
the number of users in the aggregation varies. As seen, the
reconstructions are unintelligible with > 4 users per cluster.
More recently [17] quantify the user information leakage
from the aggregate value using Mutual Information (MI).
They show that MI reduces with more clients, starting to
plateau around 10-20 users where the reconstructed image
quality of the DLG attack [48] is severely affected. Based on
these results, our cluster size range of 7 to 30 can preserve
user privacy.
User Dropout. zPROBE secure aggregation supports
user dropouts, i.e., when a user is disconnected amidst training iterations and/or in between zPROBE steps (see Fig. 1).
Fig 6 shows the effect of random user dropouts on zPROBE
defense. As shown, the fluctuations in the central model’s
test accuracy are negligible (< 0.13%). The robustness of
zPROBE aggregation protocol to user dropouts is intuitive
since the remaining users can carry on the training.

6. Related Work
Secure Aggregation. Cryptographic techniques have
been used in prior work for secure machine learning inference [20, 18] and training [37] with few parties. To support
many clients, federated learning with secure aggregation is
adopted to hide individual private updates, e.g. using random
masks [6, 3]. A line of work [11, 29] considers a different

Accuracy

100
80
60
40
20
0

0% dropout
10% dropout
15% dropout
100 200 300 400 500

Epoch

Figure 6: The effect of (a) number of clusters, and (b) user
dropout on defense.
trust model with non-colluding servers that receive secret
shares of data and collaborate to compute the aggregate.
However, realizing the non-colluding trust assumption can
be challenging in practice. Differential Privacy (DP) can
provide complementary privacy guarantees to cryptographic
methods (by protecting information leakage from output),
and have been used in conjunction to reduce the required
noise. [35] combine threshold homomorphic encryption and
differential privacy for private aggregation.
Robust Aggregation. Prior work on Byzantine-robust
aggregation sanitizes the client updates using robust statistics or historical information. (Multi-)Krum [5, 12] selects
updates with minimum Euclidean distance to their neighbors.
Coordinate-wise operations based on median and trimmed
mean [46, 42] have also been proposed that calculate the
mean of values closest to the median for each coordinate.
More recently, AKSEL [7] defines an interval around the
median and aggregates the values within that interval. [9, 30]
use the robustness of geometric median (generalized to multiple dimensions), to provide a robust update rule. Bulyan [21]
augments prior aggregation rules to ensure all coordinates
are agreed upon by a majority of user gradients.
Several works propose applying robust aggregation over
an accumulated history of gradients, assuming IID data. [1]
use the concentration of aggregated past gradients around
the median to mark byzantine workers. Similarly, [16] apply
Byzantine-resilient aggregation rules on a weighted average of past gradients using a momentum term. In lieu of
using the median, centered clipping [23] iteratively scales
the accumulated gradients to ensure robust aggregation. The
aforesaid works focus on robust aggregation under IID data
assumptions. [24] propose user clustering as an effective
way to adapt previously proposed robust aggregation methods, e.g., Krum, to heterogeneous (non-IID) data. zPROBE
designs a new aggregation rule that 1) enables efficient execution in the secure domain and 2) achieves state-of-the-art
accuracy compared to [24].
Robust and Secure Aggregation. RoFL [8] focuses on
model poisoning, when malicious users try to embed a backdoor in the model, without downgrading accuracy on benign

data. RoFL uses Pedersen commitments to implement ZKP
of norm bounds over model updates. RoFL does not support dropouts during aggregation and the proposed l-norm
bounds are unsuitable against Byzantine workers. zPROBE
considers Byzantine attacks where the malicious parties send
invalid updates to degrade the central model’s accuracy. In
this domain, BREA [34] relies on Shamir secret sharing and
multi-Krum [12] for aggregation. However, BREA reveals
the pairwise distances of client updates to the server, i.e.,
even one client’s collusion with the server would reveal all
updates.
SHARE [36] incorporates secure averaging [6] on randomly clustered clients, and filters cluster averages through
robust aggregation. Any cluster with malicious clients detected will be dropped, resulting in loss of all benign updates.
SHARE’s mitigation is to repeat the random clustering several times for each epoch, which results in increased computation and communication cost. Moreover, reclustering
compromises privacy as the server observes different variations of cluster averages which can leak information about
the user updates. Most recently, EIFFeL [10] proposes a
robust aggregation using Shamir shares of client updates,
and secret-shared non-interactive proofs (SNIP). EIFFeL
does not support rank-based statistics for robustness checks,
resulting in higher accuracy degradation, and requires access
to a clean public dataset for defense parameters.

7. Conclusion
This paper presented zPROBE, a novel framework for
low overhead, scalable, private, and robust FL in the malicious client setting. zPROBE ensures correct behavior from
clients, and performs robustness checks on model updates.
With a combination of zero-knowledge proofs and secret
sharing techniques, zPROBE provides robustness guarantees without compromising client privacy. We highlight the
effectiveness of zPROBE on seminal computer vision benchmarking, but reiterate the fact that our approach is not limited
by scale. zPROBE can handle even the most advanced computer vision FL tasks, while still maintaining the same levels
of privacy and robustness. zPROBE presents a paradigm
shift from previous work by providing a private robustness
defense relying on rank-based statistics with cost that grows
sublinearly with respect to number of clients.

8. Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (NSF) TILOS under award number CCF2112665, ARO MURI under award number W911NF-21-10322, and the Intel Collaborative Research Institute.

References
[1] Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Faeze Ebrahimianghazani, Jerry Li, and
Dan Alistarh. Byzantine-resilient non-convex stochastic gradient descent. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
[2] Gilad Baruch, Moran Baruch, and Yoav Goldberg. A little
is enough: Circumventing defenses for distributed learning.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32:8635–
8645, 2019.
[3] James Henry Bell, Kallista A Bonawitz, Adrià Gascón, Tancrède Lepoint, and Mariana Raykova. Secure single-server
aggregation with (poly) logarithmic overhead. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security, pages 1253–1269, 2020.
[4] Arjun Nitin Bhagoji, Supriyo Chakraborty, Prateek Mittal,
and Seraphin Calo. Analyzing federated learning through
an adversarial lens. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, pages 634–643. PMLR, 2019.
[5] Peva Blanchard, El Mahdi El Mhamdi, Rachid Guerraoui, and
Julien Stainer. Machine learning with adversaries: Byzantine
tolerant gradient descent. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
pages 118–128, 2017.
[6] Keith Bonawitz, Vladimir Ivanov, Ben Kreuter, Antonio
Marcedone, H Brendan McMahan, Sarvar Patel, Daniel Ramage, Aaron Segal, and Karn Seth. Practical secure aggregation
for privacy-preserving machine learning. In proceedings of
the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security, pages 1175–1191, 2017.
[7] Amine Boussetta, El-Mahdi El-Mhamdi, Rachid Guerraoui,
Alexandre Maurer, and Sébastien Rouault. Aksel: Fast byzantine sgd. In 24th International Conference on Principles of
Distributed Systems (OPODIS 2020), 2021.
[8] Lukas Burkhalter, Hidde Lycklama, Alexander Viand, Nicolas
Küchler, and Anwar Hithnawi. Rofl: Attestable robustness for
secure federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03311,
2021.
[9] Yudong Chen, Lili Su, and Jiaming Xu. Distributed statistical
machine learning in adversarial settings: Byzantine gradient descent. Proceedings of the ACM on Measurement and
Analysis of Computing Systems, 1(2):1–25, 2017.
[10] Amrita Roy Chowdhury, Chuan Guo, Somesh Jha, and Laurens van der Maaten. Eiffel: Ensuring integrity for federated
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.12727, 2021.
[11] Henry Corrigan-Gibbs and Dan Boneh. Prio: Private, robust, and scalable computation of aggregate statistics. In
14th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and
Implementation (NSDI 17), pages 259–282, 2017.
[12] Georgios Damaskinos, El Mahdi El Mhamdi, Rachid Guerraoui, Arsany Hany Abdelmessih Guirguis, and Sébastien
Louis Alexandre Rouault. Aggregathor: Byzantine machine
learning via robust gradient aggregation. In The Conference
on Systems and Machine Learning (SysML), 2019, number
CONF, 2019.
[13] Georgios Damaskinos, Rachid Guerraoui, Rhicheek Patra,
Mahsa Taziki, et al. Asynchronous byzantine machine learn-

ing (the case of sgd). In International Conference on Machine
Learning, pages 1145–1154. PMLR, 2018.
[14] Ivan Damgård, Valerio Pastro, Nigel Smart, and Sarah Zakarias. Multiparty computation from somewhat homomorphic
encryption. In Annual Cryptology Conference, pages 643–
662. Springer, 2012.
[15] Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman. New directions in
cryptography. IEEE transactions on Information Theory,
22(6):644–654, 1976.
[16] El Mahdi El Mhamdi, Rachid Guerraoui, and Sébastien
Louis Alexandre Rouault. Distributed momentum for
byzantine-resilient stochastic gradient descent. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
number CONF, 2021.
[17] Ahmed Roushdy Elkordy, Jiang Zhang, Yahya H Ezzeldin,
Konstantinos Psounis, and Salman Avestimehr. How much
privacy does federated learning with secure aggregation guarantee? arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.02304, 2022.
[18] Karthik Garimella, Zahra Ghodsi, Nandan Kumar Jha, Siddharth Garg, and Brandon Reagen. Characterizing and optimizing end-to-end systems for private inference. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems, Volume 3, pages 89–104, 2023.
[19] Jonas Geiping et al. Inverting gradients-how easy is it to break
privacy in federated learning? NeurIPs, 2020.
[20] Zahra Ghodsi, Akshaj Kumar Veldanda, Brandon Reagen,
and Siddharth Garg. Cryptonas: Private inference on a relu
budget. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
33:16961–16971, 2020.
[21] Rachid Guerraoui, Sébastien Rouault, et al. The hidden vulnerability of distributed learning in byzantium. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 3521–3530.
PMLR, 2018.
[22] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun.
Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 770–778, 2016.
[23] Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Lie He, and Martin Jaggi. Learning
from history for byzantine robust optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 5311–5319.
PMLR, 2021.
[24] Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Lie He, and Martin Jaggi.
Byzantine-robust learning on heterogeneous datasets via bucketing. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
[25] Alex Krizhevsky, Vinod Nair, and Geoffrey Hinton. Cifar-10
(canadian institute for advanced research). URL http://www.
cs. toronto. edu/kriz/cifar. html, 5, 2010.
[26] Yann LeCun. The MNIST Database. http://yann.
lecun.com/exdb/mnist/, 1998.
[27] Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick
Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.
[28] Luca Melis, Congzheng Song, Emiliano De Cristofaro, and
Vitaly Shmatikov. Exploiting unintended feature leakage in
collaborative learning. In 2019 IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy (SP), pages 691–706. IEEE, 2019.

[29] Thien Duc Nguyen, Phillip Rieger, Huili Chen, Hossein
Yalame, Helen Möllering, Hossein Fereidooni, Samuel Marchal, Markus Miettinen, Azalia Mirhoseini, Shaza Zeitouni,
Farinaz Koushanfar, Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi, and Thomas
Schneider. FLAME: Taming backdoors in federated learning. 31st USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security
22), 2022.
[30] Krishna Pillutla, Sham M Kakade, and Zaid Harchaoui.
Robust aggregation for federated learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1912.13445, 2019.
[31] Nicola Rieke, Jonny Hancox, Wenqi Li, Fausto Milletari, Holger R Roth, Shadi Albarqouni, Spyridon Bakas, Mathieu N
Galtier, Bennett A Landman, Klaus Maier-Hein, et al. The
future of digital health with federated learning. NPJ digital
medicine, 3(1):1–7, 2020.
[32] Adi Shamir. How to share a secret. Communications of the
ACM, 22(11):612–613, 1979.
[33] Virat Shejwalkar, Amir Houmansadr, Peter Kairouz, and
Daniel Ramage. Back to the drawing board: A critical evaluation of poisoning attacks on production federated learning. In
2022 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pages
1354–1371. IEEE, 2022.
[34] Jinhyun So, Başak Güler, and A Salman Avestimehr.
Byzantine-resilient secure federated learning. IEEE Journal
on Selected Areas in Communications, 2020.
[35] Stacey Truex, Nathalie Baracaldo, Ali Anwar, Thomas
Steinke, Heiko Ludwig, Rui Zhang, and Yi Zhou. A hybrid
approach to privacy-preserving federated learning. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence
and Security, pages 1–11, 2019.
[36] Raj Kiriti Velicheti, Derek Xia, and Oluwasanmi Koyejo.
Secure byzantine-robust distributed learning via clustering.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.02940, 2021.
[37] Sameer Wagh, Divya Gupta, and Nishanth Chandran. Securenn: 3-party secure computation for neural network training. Proc. Priv. Enhancing Technol., 2019(3):26–49, 2019.
[38] Xiao Wang. EMP-Toolkit. https://github.com/
emp-toolkit, accessed 2022.
[39] Chenkai Weng, Kang Yang, Jonathan Katz, and Xiao Wang.
Wolverine: fast, scalable, and communication-efficient zeroknowledge proofs for boolean and arithmetic circuits. In
2021 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pages
1074–1091. IEEE, 2021.
[40] Chenkai Weng, Kang Yang, Xiang Xie, Jonathan Katz, and
Xiao Wang. Mystique: Efficient conversions for {ZeroKnowledge} proofs with applications to machine learning.
In 30th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 21),
pages 501–518, 2021.
[41] Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist:
a novel image dataset for benchmarking machine learning
algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.
[42] Cong Xie, Oluwasanmi Koyejo, and Indranil Gupta. Generalized byzantine-tolerant sgd. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.10116,
2018.
[43] Cong Xie, Oluwasanmi Koyejo, and Indranil Gupta. Phocas:
dimensional byzantine-resilient stochastic gradient descent.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.09682, 2018.

[44] Jie Xu, Benjamin S Glicksberg, Chang Su, Peter Walker,
Jiang Bian, and Fei Wang. Federated learning for healthcare
informatics. Journal of Healthcare Informatics Research,
5(1):1–19, 2021.
[45] Wensi Yang, Yuhang Zhang, Kejiang Ye, Li Li, and ChengZhong Xu. Ffd: A federated learning based method for credit
card fraud detection. In International conference on big data,
pages 18–32. Springer, 2019.
[46] Dong Yin, Yudong Chen, Ramchandran Kannan, and Peter
Bartlett. Byzantine-robust distributed learning: Towards optimal statistical rates. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, pages 5650–5659. PMLR, 2018.
[47] Hongxu Yin et al. See through gradients: Image batch recovery via gradinversion. In CVPR, 2021.
[48] Ligeng Zhu, Zhijian Liu, and Song Han. Deep leakage from
gradients. Advances in neural information processing systems,
32, 2019.

A. Malicious Seed Modification
Fig. 7(a) demonstrates the histogram of L∞ norm of
benign gradients, observed throughout training across 100
users for CIFAR-10 dataset. As seen, majority of the gradient
norms are bounded in [0, 0.25]. Masks are generated using
seeds through a pseudorandom generator (PRG), and malicious users cannot control the resulting error when changing
the seed. Fig. 7(b) shows a histogram of mask values generated from random seeds over 10000 runs. As shown, changing the seed may cause unpredictable and drastic changes
in the mask. By changing the random seed, the generated
masks can vary anywhere between −3 × 104 to 3 × 104 ,
which is much larger than the normal observed range for
model updates. As such, when a malicious user changes the
random seed from which the masks are generated, it can lead
to easily recognizable errors in the gradient that raises alarms
for the server. Thus, in our threat model malicious users are
incentivized to use the correct seed when computing masks.
25000
20000
15000
10000
5000
00.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30

user updates is lost by replacing the aggregation with the
median, which can potentially contain Byzantine workers.

Figure 8: Test accuracy of zPROBE compared with an aggregation methodology that uses the median of cluster means.

C. Effect of Cluster Size on Inversion Attack
Fig. 9 shows the effect of cluster size on gradient inversion attacks. In Fig 9(a) we show the effectiveness of the
attack [19] for different cluster sizes. Fig 9(b) represents the
reconstruction results from user data for different number of
users participating in the aggregation round.

L-Inf

(a)

120
100
80
60
40
20
0

(a)

Original

3

2

1

0

1

Mask value

2

3

1e4

1 user

(b)
2 users

Figure 7: Histogram of (a) ResNet-20 gradient norms observed during training on CIFAR-10, and (b) mask values
when changing the random seed.

B. Effect of Aggregation Method on Accuracy
zPROBE leverages the median of averaged model updates
across user clusters to check whether the incoming updates
are benign or Byzantine. An alternative aggregation strategy
is to directly use the median of cluster means, rather than
performing the subsequent per-user checks. Fig. 8 shows
the test accuracy of zPROBE as training progresses, when
compared to the above baseline aggregation method that
applies the coordinate-wise median of cluster means. As
seen, compared to zPROBE, this baseline suffers from a
large accuracy degradation, since all information in benign

5 users

(b)

Figure 9: Performance of gradient inversion attacks for different cluster sizes.

D. zPROBE Test Accuracy
Fig. 10 shows the test accuracy of zPROBE in face of
different variations of Byzantine attacks and datasets. The
dataset is distributed evenly (IID) among n = 50 clients.
The server randomly clusters users into c = 7 groups during
each training round. We assume malicious users compromise all model updates |Sm | = 1 to maximize the accuracy
degradation.

(a) MNIST + Scale attack

(b) F-MNIST + Sign flip attack

(c) CIFAR-10 + Sign flip attack

(d) MNIST + Non-omniscient attack

(e) F-MNIST + Scale attack

(f) CIFAR-10 + Non-omniscient

Figure 10: Test accuracy as a function of FL training epochs for different attacks and benchmarks. Each plot shows the benign
training (green), Byzantine training without defense (maroon), and Byzantine training in the presence of zPROBE defense.

