MUDGUARD: Taming Malicious Majorities in
Federated Learning using Privacy-Preserving
Byzantine-Robust Clustering

arXiv:2208.10161v2 [cs.CR] 14 Nov 2023

Rui Wang1 , Xingkai Wang2 , Huanhuan Chen1 , Jérémie Decouchant1 , Stjepan Picek1,3 , Nikolaos Laoutaris4 , and
Kaitai Liang1
1

Delft University of Technology
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Radboud University
4
IMDEA Networks Institute

2

Abstract—Byzantine-robust Federated Learning (FL) aims to
counter malicious clients and train an accurate global model
while maintaining an extremely low attack success rate. Most
existing systems, however, are only robust when most of the clients
are honest. FLTrust (NDSS ’21) and Zeno++ (ICML ’20) do
not make such an honest majority assumption but can only be
applied to scenarios where the server is provided with an auxiliary
dataset used to filter malicious updates. FLAME (USENIX ’22) and
EIFFeL (CCS ’22) maintain the semi-honest majority assumption
to guarantee robustness and the confidentiality of updates. It
is therefore currently impossible to ensure Byzantine robustness
and confidentiality of updates without assuming a semi-honest
majority. To tackle this problem, we propose a novel Byzantinerobust and privacy-preserving FL system, called MUDGUARD, that
can operate under malicious minority or majority in both the
server and client sides. Based on DBSCAN, we design a new
method for extracting features from model updates via pairwise
adjusted cosine similarity to boost the accuracy of the resulting
clustering. To thwart attacks from a malicious majority, we
develop a method called Model Segmentation, that aggregates
together only the updates from within a cluster, sending the
corresponding model only to the clients of the corresponding
cluster. The fundamental idea is that even if malicious clients
are in their majority, their poisoned updates cannot harm
benign clients if they are confined only within the malicious
cluster. We also leverage multiple cryptographic tools to conduct
clustering without sacrificing training correctness and updates
confidentiality. We present a detailed security proof and empirical
evaluation along with a convergence analysis for MUDGUARD.
Our experimental results demonstrate that the accuracy of
MUDGUARD is practically close to the FL baseline using FedAvg
without attacks (≈0.8% gap on average). Meanwhile, the attack
success rate is around 0%-5% even under an adaptive attack
tailored to MUDGUARD. We further optimize our design by using
binary secret sharing and polynomial transformation leading to
communication overhead and runtime decreases of 67%-89.17%
and 66.05%-68.75%, respectively.

I.

I NTRODUCTION

Thanks to its privacy properties, Federated Learning
(FL) [43] has been widely applied in real-world applications,
e.g., prediction of the future oxygen requirements of symptomatic patients with COVID-19 [20]. Despite its attractive
benefits, FL is vulnerable to Byzantine attacks. For example,
attackers may choose to deteriorate the testing accuracy of

models in an untargeted attack. Alternatively, they might fool
models to predict an attack-chosen label without downgrading the testing accuracy in a targeted attack. Many research
works [25], [62], [59] have proved the vulnerability of FL via
well-designed attack methods, e.g., poisoning training data or
manipulating updates. Other studies [10], [64], [44], [15], [49],
[63], [55], [37] have been dedicated to strengthening FL assuming that a minority of the clients can be malicious and that
the server is honest. Beyond Byzantine attacks, FL could put
clients at high risk of privacy breach [65], [28] even if clients’
datasets are maintained locally. Several studies [49], [55],
[57] have applied secure tools, e.g., Additive Homomorphic
Encryption (AHE) [50], Differential Privacy (DP) [22], [60],
and Secure Multiparty Computation (MPC), to protect clients’
updates1 . However, these works only guarantee security when
all servers are (semi-)honest and when a minority of the clients
are malicious.
To the best of our knowledge, there does not exist any
FL system that is capable of withstanding the presence of a
majority of Byzantine clients, as well as malicious servers,
while also guaranteeing the confidentiality of updates. One
may think that existing Byzantine-robust solutions could be
trivially extended to address the above challenge. However,
that is not the case because they either violate privacy preservation requirements or are only effective in the honest majority
scenario. For example, FLTrust [15] and Zeno++ [63] require an auxiliary dataset that is independently and identically
distributed (iid) with the clients’ training datasets to rectify
malicious updates, which evidently violates the clients’ privacy. As for FLAME [49], it clusters updates and considers the
smallest cluster as a malicious group, which makes sense in the
malicious minority context. However, in the case of a malicious
majority, it is difficult to assert if a given large/small-size
cluster is malicious. EIFFeL [55] shows similar infeasibility,
since it combines existing Byzantine-robust methods (e.g.,
FLTrust [15]) with secure aggregation [11].
Contributions. We propose a practical and secure Byzantinerobust FL system, MUDGUARD, that defends against malicious
entities (i.e., malicious minority for servers and malicious
1 Note AHE and MPC require onerous computation over ciphertexts so that
the computational complexity could naturally increase.

Aggregation
strategy
Zeno++ [63]
FLTrust [15]
FLAME [49]
EIFFeL [55]
MUDGUARD (Ours)

Threat model
Malicious
server(s)

Malicious
majority clients

%
%
%
%1
"

"
"
%
%
"

Byzantine
robustness

Updates
confidentiality

No requirement for
an auxiliary dataset

Computation
complexity

Communication
complexity

"
"
"
"
"

%
%
"
"
"

%
%
"
"
"

O(d)
O(n)
O(d(S 2 + n2 ))
O((n + d)n log2 n log log n + md min(n, m2 ))
O(d + n3 )

O(nd)
O(nd)
O(d2 + Sn2 )
O(n2 + md min(n, m2 ))
O(S(d + n2 ))

d stands for the dimension of a model. n, m, and S represent the number of clients, malicious clients, and servers, respectively.
1 EIFFeL considers a malicious server to be one that infers privacy information from other parties, which is equivalent to a semi-honest server in our context.

TABLE I: Comparison of FL systems

updates directly for clustering, we first compute the pairwise
adjusted cosine similarity of updates (featured by different
directions and magnitudes of updates between every two
clients). Then we input the results to DBSCAN.
• We design a secure FL system to be compatible with the
cryptographic tools under the malicious context. To protect
the updates on the server side and guarantee all clients receive
correct aggregations, we construct a secure DBSCAN clustering that leverages cryptographic tools and secure aggregation
with Homomorphic Hash Function (HHF) [26]. We further
optimize the secure computations on the server side based on
binary secret sharing and polynomial transformation.
• We provide a formal security proof for MUDGUARD in the
UC framework. This proof captures dynamic security requirements, making MUDGUARD more practical than theoretical in
security. MUDGUARD is the first UC-secure type in the research
line of privacy-preserving FL.
• We implement MUDGUARD and perform evaluations on
(F)MNIST and CIFAR-10 to quantify its accuracy under untargeted attacks, the Attack Success Rate (ASR) under targeted
attacks or under an adaptive attack tailored to MUDGUARD, as
well as its runtime and communication costs. Our experimental
results show that the model trained by MUDGUARD maintains
comparable testing accuracy with the FL baseline - a “noattack-and-protection" FL with only honest parties (≈0.8%
gap on average under untargeted attacks). The ASR under
the targeted attacks is as low as 0%-5%. After optimizing the
cryptographic computations, the runtime and communication
costs are reduced by about 66.05%-68.75% and 67%-89.17%,
respectively. For example, in the training of ResNet-18 using
CIFAR-10, our optimization strategy can reduce training time
from 95 seconds to 48 seconds and communication costs from
16331 MB to 5909 MB, whereas a vanilla FL takes nearly 24
seconds and 758 MB per round.

majority for clients) with privacy preservation. Specifically, we
perform feature extraction on the client updates by calculating
the pairwise adjusted cosine similarity. These extracted features are taken to the DBSCAN clustering, which calculates
the pairwise L2 distance between the inputs and determines
clusters based on density. Subsequently, a new method, Model
Segmentation, aggregates the updates based on their assigned
cluster labels. The aggregated results are returned to clients
in the respective clusters. Moreover, the integration of cryptographic tools with the aforementioned calculations allows for
the establishment of both Byzantine robustness and privacy
preservation within the MUDGUARD system. In spite of the
utilization of clustering for Byzantine robustness in [49], its
approach relies on the assumption that only less than half of
clients are malicious, since updates are directly incorporated
into HDBSCAN clustering. In contrast to [49], our proposed
methodology involves preliminary feature extraction of updates
before sending them to the clustering algorithm and separate
aggregation, accommodating non-iid and malicious majority
clients. We stress that [49] is vulnerable to the non-iid and
majority of malicious clients problems due to the absence of
pre-processing of updates and cluster detection. To the best of
our knowledge, MUDGUARD is the first Byzantine-robust FL
system that is able to defend against malicious majority clients
without sacrificing clients’ privacy. We also are the first to
provide detailed security and privacy analysis under Universal
Composability (UC) in FL. In the literature on centralized
learning, a few MPC-based solutions [40], [35], [17] were
proposed for model training and malicious servers under UC.
Note that the key differences between these works and ours
are the required computing functionalities for clustering and
model training, as well as the required security properties of
the solution. The impact of these works on performance and
security is unknown when applied to FL.
We summarize the advantages of MUDGUARD on the SOTA
FL systems in Table I. For a theoretical and empirical analysis
of complexity, please refer to Appendix D and Section V-B.
Our main contributions can be described as follows.
• We formulate a new aggregation strategy, Model Segmentation, for Byzantine-robust FL to effectively avoid poisoning
attacks from a majority of malicious clients without requiring
the servers to own an auxiliary dataset. It posits that the
utilization of complex algorithms for the detection of malicious
updates is not necessary. Instead, it only suggests implementing measures to prevent the co-existence of malicious and
semi-honest clients in one aggregation.
• We propose a new method to improve the accuracy of
updates clustering under non-iid scenarios. Instead of using the

II.

BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK

A. Attacks against Federated Learning
Byzantine Attacks. Malicious clients may attempt to deteriorate the testing accuracy of the global model by intentionally
uploading poisoned updates (i.e., untargeted attacks). Instead
of harming the accuracy, the attackers may also intentionally
use samples with triggers to launch attacks that make the
model misclassify (i.e., targeted attacks). In the following, we
review some classical and SOTA untargeted attacks (Gaussian
Attack [25], Label Flipping Attack [9], Krum Attack and Trim
Attack [25]) and targeted attacks (Backdoor Attack [3] and
Edge-case Attack [58]).
2

• Gaussian Attack (GA). Malicious clients degrade the model
accuracy by uploading local updates randomly sampled from
a Gaussian distribution.
• Label Flipping Attack (LFA). Malicious clients flip the
local data labels to generate faulty gradients. In particular, the
label of each sample is flipped from y to L − 1 − y, y ∈ [L],
where L is the total number of classes.
• Krum and Trim Attacks. These two untargeted local
model poisoning attacks are optimized for Krum [10] and
the Trim-mean/Median [64] aggregation strategies, respectively. They aim to pull the global model towards the opposite
direction of the honest gradient when it is updated. Besides,
they also have attack efficacy on FedAvg.
• Backdoor Attack (BA). Byzantine clients embed triggers
to training samples and change their labels to targeted labels.
Their goal is to make the global model misclassify the correct
labels to the targeted ones when testing samples with triggers.
• Edge-case Attack (EA). The attack aims to misclassify
seemingly similar inputs that are unlikely to be part of the
training or testing data. For example, by labeling Ardis2 “7”
images as “1” and adding them to training data, EA can
easily backdoor an MNIST classifier. Similarly, the attack can
use a Southwest airplanes dataset labeled “truck” to inject a
backdoor into a CIFAR-10 classifier. Note that the attack relies
on a restricted assumption that an extra dataset resemblance
to the training dataset should be given.

into s shares before sending them to servers. This way, updates
are safeguarded from malicious servers since they do not
get sufficient shares to perform update reconstruction. Even
if malicious servers collude with malicious clients, no extra
benefit can be achieved towards compromising the update
shares belonging to semi-honest clients.
Differential Attack. We use DBSCAN in conjunction with
Model Segmentation to separate benign and malicious updates.
Features extraction with adjusted cosine similarity greatly
descends the likelihood of false positives. However, we cannot
guarantee that the clustering results are 100% correct. A semihonest client could be clustered together with other malicious
clients by a small probability as it could have a smaller
similarity from semi-honest clients than that from malicious
clients. In particular, this case happens more frequently in
SignSGD, where only taking signs of gradients to update
the model because the algorithm computing adjusted cosine
similarity disregards the magnitude of the gradients, resulting
in the same effect as calculating cosine similarity. The above
phenomenon triggers the differential attack in the following
cases. Assuming that, at t-th round, a semi-honest client is
misclustered to a malicious group. After returning aggregation
to the group, the benign updates can be easily revealed by
subtracting those malicious updates, and the inference attack
can be launched further. Another more common case is that
a malicious adversary A compromises m clients and then
makes one of them perform correct operations, i.e., acting
as a semi-honest client. This malicious-but-act-semi-honest
client, being assigned to a semi-honest group, can get benign
aggregation from each round and then conduct an inference
attack. In this work, we apply DP to make aggregations
obtained by malicious clients statistically indistinguishable
from those containing benign updates, guaranteeing that benign
updates cannot be easily identified from aggregations.

To defend against these attacks, we propose a new approach called Model Segmentation in conjunction with featureextracted DBSCAN. Different from other Byzantine-robust FL,
our proposed method generates multiple global models and
does not require servers to detect whether a particular group
is benign or not. It aggregates only updates with the same
cluster labels and returns the aggregations to the corresponding
clients. This ensures that updates with similar directions and
magnitudes are aggregated together (i.e., benign updates are
not aggregated with malicious updates), providing a guarantee
of Byzantine robustness in the case of malicious majority
clients. Different from FLAME, MUDGUARD first uses pairwise
adjusted cosine similarity to perform feature extraction on
updates, then clusters through DBSCAN. The advantage of
this is that it can reduce the false positive rate and be effective
in non-iid situations. For detailed explanations, please refer
to Section IV-B and Appendix I4. The experimental results
show that the Byzantine robustness and clustering accuracy of
MUDGUARD is better than that of FLAME as will be shown
later in Section V-A.

B. Defenses
Byzantine-robust Federated Learning. Blanchard et al. [10]
proposed Krum to select 1 out of n (local updates) as a global
update for each round, where the selected updates should have
the smallest L2 distance from others. Yin et al. [64] introduced
Trim-mean and Median to resist Byzantine attacks. The
former uses a coordinate-wise aggregation strategy. The server
calculates n − 2z values for each model parameter as the
global model update, wherein the largest and smallest z values
are filtered. Unlike FedAvg [43] computing the weighted
average of all parameters, the latter calculates the median of
parameters. This median serves as an update to the global
model. A major drawback of the aforementioned mechanism
is that it is effective only under a majority of honest clients
working with an honest server. In Median [64], the median
calculated by the server can easily be malicious if malicious
clients control a large/overwhelming proportion of updates.
This similarly applies to Trim-mean and Krum. Cao et
al. [15] proposed FLTrust to protect against a malicious
majority at the client side, assuming an honest server holds a
small auxiliary dataset. The server treats the gradients trained
from this small dataset as the root of trust. By comparing these
trusted results with the updates sent by clients, the server can
easily rule out malicious updates. Under the same assumption,
Zeno++ [63] uses an auxiliary dataset to calculate the loss
value of each local model. A client is determined to be honest

Inference Attacks. Although local datasets are not directly
revealed during the FL training process, the updates are still
subject to privacy leakage if the server is semi-honest or even
malicious [47], [42], [65]. For instance, Zhu et al. [65] investigated a method of training data reconstruction via optimizing
the L2 distance between uploaded gradients and gradients
trained from dummy samples using an L-BFGS solver. This
approach allows servers to easily reconstruct the local datasets
and achieves even pixel-wise accuracy for images and tokenwise matching accuracy for texts. To defend against such
attacks, we use Secret Sharing (SS) [56] to split client updates
2 A dataset extracted from 15,000 Swedish church records written by
different priests with various handwriting styles in the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries.

3

if the loss value is beyond the preset threshold. While using an
auxiliary dataset could be intriguing, such approaches are not
feasible in the context of FL as they violate the fundamental
premise of FL in which local datasets are not to be shared
with any parties.

received messages. Unlike the former, strictly following the
designed algorithms, the malicious clients additionally aim to
deteriorate the performance or boost the ASR of the global
model through untargeted or targeted poisoning attacks, respectively.
• Attackers’ capabilities. The malicious servers (in a minority
proportion) and clients (in a majority proportion) can deviate from the designed protocols. For example, the malicious
servers can perform an incorrect aggregation and send it back
to the semi-honest group. Moreover, malicious parties (servers
and clients) can collude with each other to infer benign aggregations and maximize the efficacy of poisoning attacks (e.g.,
the Krum attack). To resist outside adversaries, secret-shared
messages are transmitted by private communication channels.
Other messages are transmitted through public communication
channels, where outsiders are allowed to eavesdrop on these
channels and try to infer clients’ (updates) privacy during the
whole training phase.
• Attackers’ knowledge. We assume that the loss function,
data distributions, Byzantine-robust aggregation strategy, and
public parameters (including training and security parameters)
are revealed to all parties. The malicious clients can exploit
this information to design and cast adaptive attacks tailored to
MUDGUARD. For privacy reasons, the local updates and datasets
of semi-honest clients are not revealed to malicious parties.

Privacy-preserving Federated Learning. Truex et al. [57]
proposed a solution enabling clients to use AHE and DP to
secure gradients in the semi-honest context (for both clients
and the server). Since DP noise is applied on gradients, the
accuracy of the global model is deteriorated. In the scenario
of honest majority clients with two semi-honest servers, Thien
et al. [49] proposed FLAME using an MPC protocol to
protect gradients from the servers and enabling the servers
to perform clustering for Byzantine robustness. Specifically,
the clients can securely share their updates to the servers
cryptographically, e.g., via secret sharing, and the servers
can filter out malicious updates without knowing their concrete values. By expressing existing Byzantine-robust solutions
(e.g., FLTrust) as arithmetic circuits, EIFFeL [55] enables secure aggregation of verified updates. Although FLAME
and EIFFeL capture both Byzantine robustness and privacy
preservation (i.e., update confidentiality), the accuracy of the
global model could become equivalent to a random guess if
the proportion of malicious clients is ≥50%.
III.

P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

IV.

A. System Model

A. Overview

Before proceeding, we provide some assumptions about
MUDGUARD. We assume training is conducted on a dataset
D with K data samples composed with feature space X (each
sample containing all features) and a label set Y. Additionally,
D is horizontally partitioned among n clients, indicated as
Xi = Xj , Yi = Yj , Ii ∩ Ij = ∅, ∀Di , Dj , i ̸= j, where all
clients share the same feature space and labels but differ in
sample index space I. FL aims to optimize a loss function:
n
P
ki
arg min
K Li (w, Di ), where Li (·) and ki are the loss
w

MUDGUARD OVERVIEW AND D ESIGN

In a traditional FL system, clients send updates to the
servers for global model aggregation. Considering there exist
malicious clients, we should maintain the Byzantine robustness
such that malicious updates should be excluded properly. To
do so, the servers must separate the malicious clients from the
semi-honest clients. DBSCAN helps the servers to perform
clustering. Since the main difference between the malicious
and the benign is in the direction and magnitude of the
updates, we use the adjusted cosine similarity of updates as
feature extraction to obtain better clustering accuracy. Under
the (semi-)honest majority, the clustering result directly links
to the group size. However, for a dynamic malicious majority,
we cannot judge if a cluster is malicious only based on its
size. To address this issue, we propose Model Segmentation.
Unlike traditional FL generating “a unique" global model, our
proposed algorithm can yield multiple aggregation results. It
does not require the servers to know whether a given group
is malicious or not. Moreover, it only aggregates the updates
within the same cluster and then returns the results to the
corresponding clients. We thus guarantee that the semi-honest
will not be aggregated with the malicious.

i=1

function and local data size of i-th client.
For reasons that relate to the versatility of the FL system,
we also consider S (> 2) servers to carry out clustering and
aggregation (e.g., FedAvg). This allows us to protect from
malicious servers who cannot reconstruct the secrets so long
as their number is less than S/2 by using cryptographic tools,
in which clients send updates in secret-shared format. We state
that our Byzantine solution can also be executed by only one
server. In this case, considering privacy, we have to assume
that the server must be fully trusted or semi-honest. Note that
our focus here is on the existence of malicious servers. In
this research line [46], [40], secure computation is considered
among multiple servers. Due to page limit, we summarize
frequently used notations in Table VI (see Appendix A).

As far as fighting against inference attacks is concerned, we
should protect the confidentiality of the updates. For this, we
use SS to wrap the updates into a secret shared format in the
sense that individual secret shares cannot reveal the underlying
information of the updates. By doing so, we guarantee that
the updates are secured from eavesdroppers, semi-honest, or
even malicious servers and further can be used on secure
multiplication, comparison, and aggregation via cryptographic
tools. However, using SS alone is not sufficient to defend
against differential attacks. To thwart the attack, we apply
DP to prevent the attackers from extracting benign updates

B. Threat Model
We mainly consider potential threats incurred by participating clients, servers, and outside adversaries.
• Attackers’ goal. We assume that two different entities are
involved in the training: semi-honest and dynamic malicious
parties (including servers and clients), in which both try to
infer the privacy (updates) information of others from the
4

Therefore, in each training round (of the optimization),
client i derives the gradients using SGD [12]. Considering the
upcoming cryptographic clustering, one needs to compute the
signs of gradients sign(ĝit ) ∈ {−1, +1} as SignSGD [6] and
then encodes to Boolean representation, which is compatible
with binary SS and XOR operations. Without loss of generality,
we implement a widely used encoding/decoding method as

1, sign(ĝit ) = +1
ECD(sign(ĝit )) =
,
0, otherwise

Fig. 1: Optimization on the calculation of adjusted cosine
similarity.
: optimized process: by binary SS, [[CosM]] is
computed via bit-XOR.
: unoptimized process: taking
gradients or weights as updates to compute [[CosM]].

DCD(ECD(sign(ĝit ))) = 2ECD(sign(ĝit )) − 1.
This method guarantees DCD(ECD(sign(ĝit ))) = sign(ĝit ).
Each client sends the encoded updates to the servers via binary
SS and broadcasts the hash results of unencoded updates
for future verification. Although SignSGD is lightweight, it
brings a negative impact on the accuracy of clustering. Section V-A provides a detailed analysis of this impact. Note
that SignSGD has the natural capability of defending against
scaling attacks [3] since it only takes signs as updates and
clips the magnitude of gradients. An attacker still can easily
deteriorate the global model by constructing updates in the
opposite direction of benign updates.

from the semi-honest group. Since injecting noise brings a
negative influence on the accuracy of the training model, we
enable clients to perform denoising before wrapping the results
into shares. Note that this does not invalidate DP due to the
post-processing nature [22]. We also consider the malicious
minority servers and thus leverage HHF to prevent malicious
servers from performing incorrect aggregation, e.g., merging
the gradients from two different groups. Due to the page limit,
we review machine learning and security tools in Appendix C.

Clustering. As a crucial variable in FL, updates determine
the directions and magnitudes of updating in the model, while
Byzantine attackers introduce abnormal updates. Traditional
clustering approaches directly use updates as inputs, and cosine
similarity as metric [49], causing informative redundancy and
blurring obvious features, especially in deep models (e.g.,
ResNet [32]), thereby producing frequent false positives and
negatives. Since the adjusted cosine similarity measures the
difference in directions and magnitudes of updates at the same
time, we use the pairwise adjusted cosine similarity CosM as
a method for extracting features, i.e., CosM and L2 distance,
used as the input and the main metric of DBSCAN, respectively. We find that this method is effective in distinguishing
the updates because 1) calculating CosM (feature extraction) is
equivalent to reducing the informative redundancy of updates
to improve the clustering accuracy. 2) Using it to calculate
the pairwise L2 distance can expand the pairwise differences
which are not clearly computed by CosM. Thus there is a more
clear density difference between honest and malicious updates.
3) By subtracting the mean updates, CosM helps to account
for reducing the influence of non-iid, allowing for a more
accurate comparison of clients’ updates. 4) When the model
converges, using cosine similarity is inappropriate because
even semi-honest clients have updates in different directions.
For example, under a Gaussian Attack (GA), the malicious and
semi-honest clients become indistinguishable. The accuracy
of the global model drops sharply to the level of the initial
training. We provide concrete examples in Appendix I4 to
demonstrate the advantages of using CosM. Note that this
advantage is more notable when the cryptographic tools are
not optimized. Since the proposed optimization uses SignSGD
to align the magnitudes of updates, computing cosine similarity
on it naturally provides the same effect on clustering as
adjusted cosine similarity.

B. Byzantine-robust Aggregation Strategy with Cryptographic
Computations
Our workflow of the Byzantine-robust aggregation strategy
is as follows. Firstly, the clients upload the gradients of the
local models to the server side. Secondly, servers extract
features of gradients and split gradients into multiple clusters
via DBSCAN. Finally, servers aggregate the gradients in the
clusters separately and send aggregations to the corresponding
clients. In the following, we complete the strategy over secure
cryptographic computations.
Gradients Upload. The use of the pairwise adjusted cosine
similarity matrix (CosM) as a method for extracting features
is motivated by the fact that it measures both the difference
in directions and magnitudes of updates. This is particularly
useful when dealing with clients exhibiting various behaviors
and non-iid cases. In this context, CosM and L2 distance are
used as input and the metric of DBSCAN, respectively. The
most direct method of computing CosM is as follows. We first
subtract updates with their mean values. For the updates of
each client, we compute the pairwise dot product and L2 norm
to derive the numerator and denominator, respectively, and
then we can calculate CosM from the division (of numerator
and denominator). The above operations become inefficient if
the processing is carried out using cryptographic tools. The
servers are required to perform the computations of shared
mean, numerator, denomination, and then division to finally
get the shared adjusted cosine similarity matrix [[CosM]].
To improve efficiency and optimize the above method, we
consider the denoised gradients of client i at t-th round ĝit
as updates and perform binary secret sharing via SignSGD.
Note that SignSGD only takes the signs of gradients to the
update model, resulting in benign and malicious having the
same magnitudes. Thus, in this case, we can easily compute the
adjusted cosine similarity via simple bit-wise XORing. Figure
1 depicts this optimization procedure.

Next, we describe the process of our clustering. We first
extract features (different updates directions with magnitudes)
- calculating the CosM ← git ⊕ gjt , i, j ∈ [n], and then use
5

Resistance against Malicious Servers. To further prevent malicious servers from casting and sending incorrect aggregation,
we use HHF so that every client can verify if the received aggregation is correct. Specifically, the proposed method involves
a pre-upload step in which client i broadcasts hash values
of signs of gradients Hδ,ϕ (sign(ĝti )) to the remaining parties
before uploading secret-shared updates to the server side.
The servers use additive homomorphism
of HHF to calculate
Q
hash values of aggregations i∈cj Hδ,ϕ (sign(ĝti )) = Hδ,ϕ (Gjt )
based on the clustering results, where cj refers to a cluster j
containing client indexes. After receivingQ
the aggregations Gjt ,
j
the clients can calculate Hδ,ϕ (Gt ) and i∈cj Hδ,ϕ (sign(ĝit ))
based on the cluster labels and the received hash values, and
subsequently verify whether these two values are equal or not.
Note that this method considers the possibility of malicious
servers that may send incorrect aggregations and IndM to the
semi-honest clients. However, since only a minority of servers
are assumed to be malicious, the semi-honest clients take the
most consistent results as the real results.

it as the input for clustering, thereby reducing the rate of
false positives. Commonly, the adjusted cosine similarity of
two vectors is obtained by first calculating the dot product of
the vectors and then dividing them by the product of their
respective L2 norm. Since encoding updates ĝit ∈ {−1, +1}d
to git ∈ {0, +1}d is inspired by [53], we compute XOR of git
with d − 2p bits, which is equivalent to the result of the dot
product of ĝit , where p is the counted number of set bits.
After that, the servers collaboratively compute pairwise L2 distance matrix EucM using secure multiplications
(vectorij ← CosMi − CosMj , i, j ∈ [n], xij ← vectorij ·
x −1
(x −1)2
(x −1)3
vectorij , and EucMij ← 1 + ij2 − ij 8
+ ij16 ) and
compare with density α to derive an indication matrix IndM,
where IndM = 1 if EucM ≤ α, otherwise IndM = 0. Then by
applying the DBSCAN, one can derive cluster labels. Note that
the main focus of this paper is not on optimizing DBSCAN,
we thus do not describe how to retrieve cluster labels from
IndM. We refer interested readers to [24].
We see that α has a crucial influence on clustering accuracy.
According to the conclusion of Bhagoji et al. [8], benign and
malicious updates follow normal distributions. We formally
derive its upper bound of selection (see Theorem 1 and its
proof in Appendix G).

C. System Design
Assume client i ∈ [n] holds a horizontally partitioned
n
S
dataset Di satisfying D =
Di , at t-th round, MUDGUARD
works as follows.

Theorem 1 (Density Selection). Suppose the distribution of
benign and √
malicious updates obeys the normal distribution,
setting α < 2 guarantees that malicious clients conducting
a poisoning attack will not be grouped together with benign
clients.

i=1

Protocol MUDGUARD

√
Note that taking α < 2 only allows malicious clients to
be identified as noise points, which is not a 100% guarantee
that all semi-honest clients are clustered together. Due to the
difference in training data, it could happen that the distances
between a √
semi-honest client and other semi-honest clients are
greater than 2 by chance, resulting in the semi-honest client
being identified as a noise point.

➊ Local Training. For each local minibatch, each client
conducts SGD and takes gradients git as updates.
➋ Noise Injection. Each client adds noise into git to satisfy
eit ← git / max(1, ||git ||2 /∆) + N (0, ∆2 σ 2 ).
DP: g
➌ Denoising. To improve accuracy, each client denoises
e
git by ĝit ← KS(e
git , N )·e
git , where KS(·) is the KS distance.
➍ SS. Each client splits git ← ECD(sign(ĝit )) into S shares
by binary SS with Tiny Oblivious Transfer (OT) and sends
SS
the shares to S servers: [[git ]] ←− git . Besides, by running
HHF, all clients broadcast Hδ,ϕ (sign(ĝit )).
➎ Feature Extraction. After receiving n shares, each
server locally computes a pairwise adjusted cosine similarity matrix by bit-XOR: [[CosMij ]] ← [[git ]] ⊕ [[gjt ]],
i, j ∈ [n]. To further compute L2 distance, all servers
convert Boolean shares to arithmetic shares by correlated
randomness.
➏ L2 Distance Computation. After conversion, deriving
multiplicative SS, each server uses HE or OT to produce a triple, satisfying further multiplications. Therefore,
each server takes [[CosM]] as the inputs of DBSCAN
and then computes [[EucM]] by (a) pairwise subtraction:
[[vectorij ]] ← [[CosMi ]] − [[CosMj ]], i, j ∈ [n], (b) dot
product: [[xij ]] ← [[vectorij ]] · [[vectorij ]], and (c) approxi[[x ]]−1
([[x ]]−1)2
mated square root: [[EucMij ]] ← 1+ ij2 − ij 8
+
([[xij ]]−1)3
.
16
➐ Element-wise Comparison. By comparing each element
of EucM with density parameter α, each server can
derive shares of indicator matrix [[IndM]], {IndMij = 1 |
EucMij ≤ α}.

Model Segmentation. To deal with Byzantine-majority attacks, after obtaining the cluster labels, the servers aggregate
the updates within the same cluster and return the results
(and their hash values) to the corresponding clients. In our
design, unless a malicious client acts honestly, then it will
not be grouped into a cluster with the semi-honest clients,
with a relatively large probability. This protects benign clients
by keeping poisonous updates from global model updates
computed for benign clusters. Note here we do not further
explore the case in which malicious clients choose to act
honestly during training. In fact, if malicious clients behave
semi-honestly, we will obtain a more accurate global model.
In a sense, this is a bonus for semi-honest clients. After
all, in the context of Model Segmentation, it is not required
to identify malicious groups via any verification algorithms,
which is a positive thing since it removes the processing
burden from the servers as the latter do not need to run
verification over “encrypted-and-noised" updates. Compared
with the method of FLAME, Model Segmentation does not need
to assume that most clients in the FL system are (semi-)honest.
When integrated with an optimized clustering method, Model
Segmentation can also enhance the Byzantine robustness of the
MUDGUARD.
6

works [2], [45] leverage straightforward transformation under
the cases with only semi-honest parties.

➑ Reconstruction. All servers run a reconstruction algorecon
rithm to reveal IndM: IndM ←− [[IndM]] and broadcast it
to the client side. By DBSCAN, one can derive cluster
labels. Based on these labels, the clients learn about
clustering information to perform aggregation verification
in step ➓.
➒ Model Segmentation. The servers aggregate shares
(based on the number of labels
c) with the same labels
P
after decoding: {[[Gjt ]] ← i∈cj DCD([[git ]]) | cj = {i |
i ∈ [n]}, j ∈ [c], } and send to the corresponding clients.
➓ Aggregation Verification. After reconstructing aggregation, according to cluster labels, each client verifies
Q
?
aggregation by i∈cj Hδ,ϕ (sign(ĝit )) = Hδ,ϕ (Gjt ). If the
equation holds, clients accept the aggregation results;
otherwise, reject and abort.

Multiplication. As shown in step ➏ of Protocol IV-C, multiplications are necessary in DBSCAN. If we consider the semihonest majority setting on the server side, the replicated SS and
SSS can be applied here since both satisfy the multiplicative
property, in which two shares multiplications can be computed
locally without any interaction. For the existence of malicious
servers, we consider the protocol proposed by Lindell et
al. [41], modifying SPDZ [19] to the setting of multiplicative
secret sharing modulo a prime (including replicated SS and
SSS). Furukawa et al. [27] also proposed a similar variant for
TinyOT. Both are based on the observation that the optimistic
triple production using HE or OT can be replaced by producing
a triple using multiplicative secret sharing instead.
Secure Comparison with Density α. With arithmetic shares,
the comparison (step ➐ of Protocol IV-C) requires extra correlated randomness, especially secret random bits in the larger
domains. For the semi-honest majority servers, we follow the
protocol [16] with Z2 to implement comparison efficiently.
Under the malicious minority, we should check if the output
is actually a bit. We follow [18] to multiply a secret random
bit with comparison output and then reconstruct it. If the
reconstructed value is a bit, it proves that the malicious servers
do not deviate from the comparison protocol.

We note that the corresponding implementation-level algorithms of MUDGUARD are given in Appendix B and will be
used in the experiments.
D. Privacy Preservation Guarantee
Differential attack resistance. As shown in step ➋ and ➌
of Protocol IV-C, each client i can add differentially private
noise into gradients and perform denoising later. Like [48],
we use KS distance (of noised gradients and noise distribution) as a metric to denoise by multiplying noised gradients.
Differentially private updates are first denoised, taken signs,
and encoded before being secretly shared.

E. Security Analysis
MUDGUARD achieves security properties under malicious
majority clients and malicious minority servers. Malicious
parties may arbitrarily deviate from the protocol, while the
rest of the parties are semi-honest, trying to infer information
as much as possible (but following the protocol). We assume
malicious clients and servers may collude with each other.

Binary SS. Unlike arithmetic SS in domain Z2b , binary SS
works with b = 1, where b is the bit length. To resist malicious
clients deviating from SS specifications, we apply OT in our
design (step ➍ of Protocol IV-C). However, this brings a
considerable increase in communication costs. Furukawa et
al. [27] used TinyOT to generalize multi-party shares with
communication complexity linear in the security parameter.
We follow this method so that each client i binary shares
its updates to S servers. The SS scheme guarantees that a
malicious server cannot reconstruct the secret even if colluding
with the rest of the servers under a malicious minority setting.

A secure FL system satisfies correctness, privacy, and
soundness. The latter two are security requirements. Informally, the requirements are: (1) the adversary learns nothing
but the differentially private output; (2) the adversary cannot
provide an invalid result accepted by a benign client. We first
define the security in the UC framework [14]. This allows
the system to remain secure and capable to be arbitrarily
combined with other UC secure instances. In such a framework, security is defined by a well-designed ideal functionality that captures several properties simultaneously, including
correctness, privacy, and soundness. Specifically, Figure E
(Appendix E) shows our ideal functionality FMUDGUARD . The
definition captures all required security properties except DP
and soundness against malicious clients. Appendix E will
discuss the remaining.

XOR. In step ➎ of Protocol IV-C, after receiving shares,
each server can compute the pairwise dot product independently. Assume a server s has [[git ]]s , where s ∈ [S]. Since
git = [[git ]]1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ [[git ]]S , we have git ⊕ gjt = [[git ]]1 ⊕
[[gjt ]]1 · · ·⊕[[git ]]S ⊕[[gjt ]]S , ∀i, j ∈ n. Therefore, in this case, each
server s can compute [[dot_product]] by {[[dot_productij ]]s =
[[git ]]s ⊕ [[gjt ]]s | ∀i, j ∈ [n]} locally and without interactions
with other servers. By multiplying a constant, one can derive
shares of adjusted cosine similarity. Using binary SS can help
us to save element multiplication and division operations.

We prove the security in a F-hybrid model. Our proof
adopts three existing ideal functionalities: FRO , FSS and FB2A .
The first is for the random oracle model, and the latter two
are the ideal functionalities of secret sharing [27] and bit-toarithmetic conversion [54] respectively. We have the following
theorem:

Bit to Arithmetic Conversion. The servers also need to
convert the shares in Z2 to arithmetic shares (Z2b ) to support
the subsequent linear operations and multiplications. We implement the conversion by following [54]. A common method
is to use correlated randomness in these two domains (doublyauthenticated bits) and extend them. After this, the servers
can derive arithmetic shares of the dot product. Note some

Theorem 2. MUDGUARD securely realizes FMUDGUARD in the
(FRO , FSS , FB2A )-hybrid model, against malicious-majority
clients and malicious-minority servers, considering arbitrary
collusions between malicious parties.
7

Dataset

The remaining two properties are related to data output,
which is not concerned with the cryptographic view. Specifically, DP is provided by adding noise (Appendix E), and
soundness against malicious clients is provided by Model
Segmentation.

learning rate

Note our well-designed functionality captures as many attacks as possible. In other words, soundness against malicious
clients and DP cannot be achieved under the UC model.
On the one hand, recognizing malicious clients is quite a
subjective task since they do not deviate from the protocol in
cryptographic ways. There might be a benign client providing
similar inputs that seem to be malicious, with a non-negligible
possibility. On the other hand, the output with DP can be
obtained by the adversary in our definition. Hence differential
attacks should not be captured in the functionality.

proportion of malicious clients ξ
λ
α
#edge-case
DP’s (ϵ, δ, ∆)

FL system settings. Table II gives the detailed parameters. We
follow the parameters setting of [43], [6], set the minibatch size
to 128, and use the Adam optimizer [34] for training LeNet
and ResNet-18. In the experiments, all the clients participate in
the training from beginning to end. By default, we assume that
there exist 100 clients splitting the training data with non-iid
degree q=0.5; the proportion of malicious clients is set to ξ=0.6
(i.e., 60 out of 100 clients are malicious). The testing accuracy
is computed over the whole testing dataset. We inject triggers
into the whole testing dataset to inspect the ASR of BA. The
Ardis and Southwest airplanes datasets with changed labels
are used to inspect the ASR of EA in MNIST and CIFAR10, respectively. Note that the main focus of the experiments
is to examine the complexity of MUDGUARD and to check
if MUDGUARD can effectively fight against Byzantine attacks.
Thus, we do not further present details for client selection
during each round of training, which will not affect the test
of Byzantine robustness. In the clustering and robustness
comparison, we define weights-MUDGUARD as a variant
of MUDGUARD, which uses SGD to update models and takes
pairwise adjusted cosine similarity of updates as inputs and
L2 norm as clustering metric, without applying any security
tools.

′

wit ← wt−1 − η∇L(wt−1 , Di ), wit ← wt−1 − η∇L(wt−1 , Di ).
Then, client i solves the optimization problem:
′

arg min λLi (wt−1 , Di ) + (1 − λ)∥wit − wit ∥COS ,
′

wit

where ∥·∥COS refers to adjusted cosine distance. λ ∈ (0, 1] is
a hyperparameter to balance the efficacy and stealthiness of an
attack. A smaller λ makes the attack harder to be filtered, but
its efficacy is less to be upheld. Section V-A gives a detailed
analysis.
V.

300

CIFAR-10

Byzantine-attacks settings. We consider six poisoning attacks
aforementioned in Section II-A. For GA, Krum, and Trim
attacks, we adopt the default settings in [25]. To achieve a
fair comparison, we follow the settings of BA [49], where a
white rectangle with size 6×6 is seen as a trigger embedded
on the left side of the image. The Poisoning Data Rate (PDR)
is also aligned with the settings of [49]. Wang et al. [59] did
not provide a dataset for FMNIST. In the experiments, we do
not consider launching EA to FMNIST. To balance the main
and attack tasks, we set λ as 0.5.

Recall that in Section III-B, a Byzantine-robust aggregation
strategy is available to attackers. Malicious clients can adapt
their attacks to nullify the robustness of the system. Note
that untargeted attacks (e.g., Krum and Trim attacks) solve
an optimization problem to maximize the efficacy of attacks,
meaning the strategies of untargeted attacks are already optimal. Therefore, we design and evaluate an adaptive backdoor
attack for MUDGUARD. Specifically, the attack is formulated by
adding a sub-task to the attack optimization problem. Given
the fact that MUDGUARD achieves Byzantine-robustness by
aggregating only benign updates as much as possible based on
adjusted cosine distance, the sub-task of this attack is to try
to minimize the adjusted cosine distance of malicious updates
from that of benign updates. Formally, a malicious
client i first
′
derives benign and malicious updates (wit and wit ) with owned
′
unpoisoned and poisoned data (Di and Di ), respectively, at
the t-th round:

′

0.01

FMNIST

[10, 100, 500]
1
[0.1, 0.5, 0.9]
1
250
1200
0.01 with 1e−5
weight decay
[0.1, 0.6, 0.9]
0.5
1
/
300
(5, 1e−5 , 5)

TABLE II: FL system settings. The parameters’ range and
default values are in the form of “[min, default, max]".

F. Adaptive attack

′

MNIST

#clients
clients subsampling rate
non-iid degree
#local epochs
#global epochs

E VALUATION
A. Evaluation on Accuracy

We use MNIST [39] and FMNIST [61] to train CNN
same with [15] and CIFAR-10 [36] to train ResNet-18 [32].
Please refer to Appendix H1 for a detailed description. To
conduct a fair comparison against existing Byzantine-robust
methods, we follow the training settings of [15], [49]. Based
on the number of classes L, the clients are divided into L
groups. Non-iid degree q determines the heterogeneity of data
distribution. For example, if we use MNIST with 10 classes
and q = 0.5, the samples with label “0" are allocated to
the group “0" with probability 0.5 (but to other groups with
probability 1−0.5
10−1 ).

We set the baseline as a “no-attack-and-defense" FL, which
means it excludes the use of any cryptographic tools as well
as Byzantine-robust solutions but only trains with fully honest
parties. This reaches the highest accuracy and fastest convergence speed for FL training. We then set #clients participating
in the baseline training equal to #semi-honest clients in the
malicious existence case. We conduct each experiment for
10 independent trials and further calculate the average to
achieve smooth and precise accuracy performance. We evaluate
MUDGUARD’s accuracy and ASR by varying the total number
of clients, the proportion of malicious clients, and the degree
8

Attacks

baseline

GA

LFA

Krum

Trim

AA

BA

EA

ξ

0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

0.975
0.977
0.975
0.969
0.969

0.973
0.975
0.971
0.968
0.968

0.967
0.974
0.971
0.964
0.968

0.955
0.952
0.956
0.942
0.943

0.965
0.96
0.953
0.944
0.937

0.979 / 0
0.979 / 0.002
0.977 / 0
0.976 / 0.003
0.971 / 0.005

0.972 / 0.002
0.968 / 0.001
0.963 / 0.002
0.961 / 0.005
0.963 / 0.002

0.966 / 0.03
0.968 / 0.023
0.953 / 0.07
0.965 / 0.085
0.963 / 0.093

n

10
50
100
200
500

0.978
0.975
0.977
0.962
0.763

0.978
0.97
0.975
0.962
0.762

0.965
0.958
0.974
0.948
0.72

0.961
0.96
0.952
0.951
0.722

0.962
0.949
0.96
0.943
0.735

0.976 / 0
0.975 / 0
0.979 / 0.002
0.963 / 0.002
0.738 / 0.004

0.976 / 0
0.975 / 0
0.968 / 0.001
0.961 / 0
0.762 / 0.001

0.975 / 0
0.967 / 0.02
0.968 / 0.023
0.962 / 0.042
0.756 / 0.007

q

0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9

0.976
0.974
0.977
0.898
0.709

0.975
0.973
0.975
0.894
0.682

0.978
0.974
0.974
0.872
0.705

0.975
0.966
0.952
0.887
0.694

0.975
0.972
0.96
0.906
0.689

0.978 / 0
0.98 / 0
0.979 / 0.002
0.89 / 0.013
0.689 / 0.017

0.975 / 0.003
0.978 / 0.002
0.968 / 0.001
0.876 / 0.011
0.707 / 0.025

0.976 / 0.031
0.978 / 0.026
0.968 / 0.023
0.883 / 0.039
0.72 / 0.06

TABLE III: Comparison of accuracy with baseline and ASR by an increasing proportion of malicious clients (ξ ≥ 0.5), #clients
n and non-iid degree q, where MNIST is used. The results under targeted attacks are in the form of “testing accuracy / ASR".

of non-iid; and further compare the performance with the
baseline.

clients, is larger than 0.1 in some trials.
As shown in Figure 2b-e, the accuracy of the semi-honest
group under these attacks converges slightly slower than the
baseline. LFA, Krum, and Trim attacks aim to either train
poisoned data or optimize local poisoned models to deteriorate
the global model’s testing accuracy. Due to the attacks being
relatively slow and not as direct as GA, malicious updates
cannot deviate 100% from benign updates at the beginning
of the training (which means that malicious and semi-honest
clients could be clustered together). However, with more training rounds, the deviation becomes clearer. Thus, MUDGUARD
separates the two groups easily.

Table III shows that, under GA, AA, BA, and EA, the
testing accuracy is on par with the baseline (with only a
0.008 gap on average) in MNIST. However, compared with
the baseline, the results of MUDGUARD under LFA, Krum,
and Trim attacks show slight drops (on average, 0.025 in
MNIST). This is so because MUDGUARD has slow convergence
and large fluctuation. This is incurred by two factors. To
reduce the overheads of secure computations, we apply binary
SS in SignSGD. SignSGD could cause negative impacts on
clustering. Only taking the signs of the gradients can ignore
the effect of the magnitudes of the malicious gradients. This
makes the clustering a bit prone to inaccuracy. The other factor
is the LFA and Krum/Trim attacks either poison the training
data and further poison updates or the local model to optimize
the attacks. In the early stage of training, the malicious models
do not perfectly fit the poisoned training data and local models
yet. Thus, the semi-honest and malicious clients could be
classified into the same cluster.

AA, BA, and EA have no impact on the model’s testing
accuracy since their main purpose is to improve the ASR
(nearly equal to 1 without defense). Under MUDGUARD, the
final ASR is well suppressed. The ASR of AA and BA are
close to 0 in MNIST (see Figure 2f-g). But the ASR of EA
is much higher than that of AA and BA, reaching an average
of 0.041. This is because, in EA, the edge-case training sets
owned by attackers are very similar to the training sets with
the target labels. If the discriminative capability of the model
is not strong enough, the update directions of semi-honest and
malicious gradients are also very close, making it difficult for
MUDGUARD to distinguish them.

Figure 2 presents an overview of the testing accuracy (of
baseline and semi-honest and malicious groups) and ASR (of
the two groups) under Byzantine attacks in the default settings
of Table II, where MNIST is used.3 We see that semi-honest
clients can obtain comparable accuracy to the baseline at the
end of the training. In Figure 2a-d, the accuracy of the semihonest group and the baseline sharply increase from 0.1 at
epoch 0 to around 0.95 at epoch 25, then gradually converge
to 0.97. In the GA, since the malicious group can only receive
aggregation of noise, their accuracy always fluctuates around
0.1, equalling a random guess probability. As for LFA, the
model accuracy gradually drops from 0.1 (at the beginning)
to 0. This is because their models are trained on label-flipped
datasets, while the labels of the testing set are not flipped. If
the testing set is used to detect a poisoned model, the result
should be flipped labels and failing to match the labels in the
testing set, which results in 0. Since semi-honest and malicious
clients can be classified into the same cluster at the beginning
of the training, the accuracy of their models, w.r.t. malicious

The experimental results in FMNIST and CIFAR-10 show
the same trends as those in MNIST under the tested attacks.
Due to space limitations, we present these results in Appendix H2.
Impact of the proportion of malicious clients. We evaluate
testing accuracy and ASR when the proportion of malicious
clients ξ ≥ 0.5. In Tables III, VII, and VIII, we can see that
all accuracy results show a slightly downward trend with the
increase of ξ in three datasets. For the baseline, the accuracy
on average drops 0.008, 0.057, and 0.084 in MNIST, FMNIST,
and CIFAR-10, respectively. Under GA, AA, BA, and EA,
this kind of decline is on par with the baseline, whether
in MNIST (0.003-0.009), FMNIST (0.059-0.66), or CIFAR10 (0.078-0.093). Under the LFA, Krum, and Trim attacks,
affected by the slow convergence and fluctuation, the testing
accuracy of MUDGUARD also declines a bit more than the
baseline, which is 0.012-0.028, 0.035-0.055, and 0.089-0.107

3 The lines refer to average cases, while the shadow outlines the max and
min accuracy of each epoch.

9

grows with the increase in the number of malicious clients. In
conclusion, MUDGUARD is effective in maintaining accuracy
even when the proportion of malicious clients is ≥ 50%. While
there is a slight decline in accuracy in some cases, it is on par
with the baseline and does not significantly affect the overall
performance of the system.

(a) Gaussian Attack

(b) Label Flipping Attack

(c) Krum Attack

(d) Trim Attack

(e) Adaptive Attack

Impact of the total number of clients. Tables III, VII
and VIII, show the comparable testing accuracy of MUDGUARD
under different attacks, as well as ASR of BA and EA when
the total number of clients is set from 10 to 500. We observe
that the accuracy appears to fall whilst the client number is
increasing, especially when #clients = 500, it descends by
about 0.2, 0.25, and 0.4 in MNIST, FMINST, and CIFAR-10,
respectively. This is caused by a relatively small number of
training samples. For example, in CIFAR-10, each client can
only be assigned 100 samples, which does not capture one
minibatch size, resulting in a “bad" performance in terms of
testing accuracy. However, MUDGUARD is not affected by this
factor, and it can further defend against all untargeted attacks
to maintain accuracy at the same level as the baseline. The
ASR of AA and BA are controlled to nearly 0%. Although EA
provides a higher ASR (than AA and BA), it drops to nearly
0 when #clients = 500, which confirms that its effectiveness
relies on how well the model learns. Overall, MUDGUARD can
maintain a high level of accuracy under different attacks and
across a range of client numbers and can effectively defend
against untargeted attacks. Even when against EA, MUDGUARD
can reduce its ASR to nearly 0%.
Impact of the degree of non-iid. We further present the testing
accuracy and ASR for the cases where the degree of non-iid
ranges from 0.1 to 0.9 in Tables III, VII, and VIII. We can see
that in the presence of attacks, MUDGUARD can still remain
at the same level of performance as the baseline, dropping
only 0.018 on average. The largest decrease is 0.067 when
q = 0.5, which happens under the Krum attack on training
LeNet with FMNIST. Note the accuracy and the degree of noniid show a negative correlation with/without attacks, which is
also in line with the conclusion of [43] that FedAvg performs
not well in the case of heterogeneous data distribution. The
ASR of BA appears to have a slight growth as q ascends in
(F)MNIST. This is because, in the high degree of non-iid, the
distances among semi-honest clients also raise. For targeted
attacks like AA and BA, the directions of updates are closer
to those of benign updates than those of untargeted attacks. At
the beginning of training, there are cases when the distances
between malicious clients and semi-honest clients are similar
to those between semi-honest clients, making it difficult for
MUDGUARD to capture subtle differences. For the ASR of
EA, as concluded in analyzing the impact of total clients,
EA performs poorly when the model’s accuracy is low. As
a general conclusion, MUDGUARD achieves a high robustness.
Semi-honest clients can get accurate models, while malicious
clients fail to attack but also are unable to get the models.

(f) Backdoor Attack

(g) Edge-case Attack

Fig. 2: Comparison of testing accuracy among baseline, semihonest, and malicious groups under untargeted attacks (a-d)
and ASR between the groups under targeted attacks (e-f),
where we train MNIST by the default settings in Table II.

in MNIST, FMINST, and CIFAR-10, respectively. Recall that
malicious clients hold a portion of the benign dataset but do
not contribute to the global model (note this equals to the
case where the portion of the benign dataset is missing). From
this perspective, the accuracy should be related to the number
of semi-honest clients, where the max accuracy we achieve
could correspond to the case when the clients are all semihonest. Beyond the accuracy, the ASR of EA has an upward
trend while the number of malicious clients is increasing, rising
by 0.005 and 0.048 in MNIST and FMNIST. Since EA is
not perfectly distinguished by MUDGUARD, the ASR naturally

Effectiveness of clustering. To investigate the effectiveness
of our clustering approach, we present the impact on True
Positives Rate (TPR) and True Negatives Rate (TNR) under
all attacks of ξ = 0.6 in Table IV and compare against the
method of FLAME. The FLAME takes updates as inputs and
cosine similarity as a metric for clustering. Note on the server
side, Model Segmentation does not need to identify which
10

MNIST

ξ =0.6

GA

LFA

Krum

Trim

AA

BA

EA

FMNIST

CIFAR-10

TPR

TNR

TPR

TNR

TPR

TNR

FLAME
weightsMUDGUARD
MUDGUARD

0.821

0.846

0.848

0.847

0.879

0.928

1

1

1

1

1

1

0.957

1

0.94

1

0.966

1

FLAME
weightsMUDGUARD
MUDGUARD

0.653

0.612

0.634

0.655

0.742

0.711

0.974

0.987

0.975

0.977

0.98

0.985

0.929

0.924

0.927

0.916

0.943

0.967

FLAME
weightsMUDGUARD
MUDGUARD

0.587

0.622

0.521

0.63

0.527

0.578

0.974

0.953

0.973

0.968

0.971

0.966

0.916

0.929

0.96

0.933

0.967

0.959

FLAME
weightsMUDGUARD
MUDGUARD

0.691

0.679

0.699

0.664

0.646

0.615

0.976

0.964

0.975

0.965

0.973

0.988

0.938

0.944

0.927

0.913

0.964

0.958

FLAME
weightsMUDGUARD
MUDGUARD

0.591

0.573

0.612

0.625

0.766

0.719

0.998

0.982

0.99

0.982

0.984

0.982

0.971

0.943

0.941

0.935

0.943

0.96

FLAME
weightsMUDGUARD
MUDGUARD

0.777

0.763

0.794

0.83

0.856

0.897

0.957

0.969

0.965

0.97

0.963

0.979

0.936

0.928

0.926

0.931

0.947

0.928

FLAME
weightsMUDGUARD
MUDGUARD

0.313

0.32

_

_

0.248

0.288

0.899

0.903

_

_

0.893

0.921

0.856

0.876

_

_

0.827

0.83

extent by binary SS, from the view of testing accuracy and
ASR, MUDGUARD achieves higher TPR and TNR than FLAME.
In terms of other analyses of hypeparameters (i.e., α and λ),
please refer to Appendix H2. Appendix F shows the detailed
convergence analysis of MUDGUARD.
Robustness comparison against other methods. We present
a comparison among MUDGUARD and SOTA methods
(FLTrust, FLAME, Zeno++, and EIFFeL) in terms of robustness, as shown in Figure 3, where MNIST is used. Several
Byzantine-robust FL systems can easily and directly apply to
EIFFeL. We select the two of them (please refer to [55])
for comparison, namely FLTrust and Zeno++. For brevity, we
refer to them as EIFFeL-FLtrust and EIFFeL-Zeno++
hereafter. To demonstrate the advantages of MUDGUARD (based
on SignSGD), we also compare its robustness with both
SignSGD and FedAvg w/o defense. To investigate the impact
of the cryptographic tools on testing accuracy and ASR, we
also compare MUDGUARD with weights-MUDGUARD. One
may see that MUDGUARD, countering the case of the malicious
majority on the client side, does outperform most existing
approaches.
In Figure 3a-d, the accuracy of (weights-)MUDGUARD
and EIFFeL-(FLTrust/Zeno++) can be maintained at
the same level as the baseline (about 0.97). Due to the
impacts of misclustering, weights-MUDGUARD has a 0.02
accuracy gap with EIFFeL-FLTrust. MUDGUARD (with
DP noise) commits a roughly 0.01 accuracy loss as compared to weights-MUDGUARD. The accuracy of others decreases with the increase in malicious clients, especially when
ξ ≥ 0.5, the accuracy drops abruptly to the same level
of FedAvg without defense. For the ASR of AA and BA,
apart from EIFFeL-(FLTrust/Zeno++), MUDGUARD and
weights-MUDGUARD, all the remaining methods suddenly
increase to 1 at ξ=0.4/0.5. Since EA has better attack ability
(than AA and BA), weights-MUDGUARD and MUDGUARD
suffer from a nearly 0.08 gap to EIFFeL-FLTrust. The
ASR of others can raise from ξ = 0.1 and finally reach 1.0
at ξ = 0.5. SignSGD only limits the magnitude of malicious
updates rather than filtering them out. Still, it can provide a
certain level of defense (Figure 3) when there is a low malicious proportion (ξ=0.1-0.2) (compared to FedAvg having an
average of 0.3 higher testing accuracy under untargeted attacks,
and an average lower ASR of 0.4 under targeted attacks). As
the number of malicious clients rises, its robustness drop to
the level of FedAvg w/o defense.

TABLE IV: Effectiveness of clustering among FLAME
method, weights-MUDGUARD, and MUDGUARD.

cluster is malicious/semi-honest. We consider false positives
to occur if semi-honest clients are grouped with the malicious.
On average, under GA, the TPR and TNR improve from
0.151 and 0.126 in FLAME to 1 in weights-MUDGUARD,
respectively. Since MUDGUARD is based on SignSGD, only
the signs of updates are taken. Ignoring the magnitude effect,
there is a reduction in TPR (an average reduction of 0.046
as compared to weights-MUDGUARD). Furthermore, TNR
does not drop as we set the appropriate parameters according
to Theorem 1. The same changes can be captured in the case
of LFA: weights-MUDGUARD has an average increase of
0.3 and 0.324 in TPR and TNR, respectively, as compared to
FLAME. Compared with weights-MUDGUARD, MUDGUARD
drops by 0.04 and 0.05. We see that under other attacks (LFA,
Krum, Trim, AA, BA, and EA), TPR and TNR are lower than
the case under GA. Because they launch attacks on either
training data or optimizing poisoned models, all updates at
the beginning of training have high similarities, yielding those
updates being clustered together and the cases of misclustering.
The true rates of CIFAR-10 are higher than those of (F)MNIST,
because we can set more rounds to train ResNet-18. After the
model converges, the true rates reach almost 100%. Thence,
MUDGUARD obtains more correct clusters.

FLAME indicates that a small-size cluster should be a
malicious group. Thus, it is easy to confirm malicious clients
via clustering. In the case of the malicious majority, it is hard to
identify the malicious/semi-honest via group size. FLTrust
assumes that before training, an honest server collects and
trains on a small dataset. In each round, the server takes the
updates trained by this small dataset as the root of trust. The
“trusted" results are then compared to the updates sent by the
clients. If the cosine similarity between them is too small, the
updates will be filtered out. With this approach, the accuracy
of the global model remains equivalent to that of the baseline.
We state that MUDGUARD is on par with FLTrust, but it
does not suffer from the restriction that the servers need to
collect an auxiliary dataset ahead of training. We also see that
when the proportion of malicious clients rises, the accuracy of

From the above analysis, we conclude that TNR and TPR
are related to the number of training rounds, attack type,
and the values of updates. Because MUDGUARD groups high
similarity updates into one cluster and does not need to identify
malicious/semi-honest clusters, the performance of clustering
is less affected by the proportion of malicious clients. Similar
results, like Table IV, can be captured even in the case when
ξ >0.6. Through Figure 2, Table IV, and the above discussion,
we state that although TNR and TPR are affected to a certain
11

model training on the client side. Recall that we propose an
optimization in Figure 1 (Section IV). We present the average
overheads of each round of training so as to illustrate the
optimized and unoptimized results in terms of different training
models and honest/malicious contexts on the server side. We
use LeNet and ResNet as models, and the overheads are related
to their dimensionality (instead of the training data).

MUDGUARD shows a slight decline. When clients upload their
updates, MUDGUARD can only aggregate them with similar
directions. If there is only a small percentage of semi-honest
clients in the system, we naturally have an incomplete training
set, causing a loss in accuracy. Note the same trends as those
in MNIST can be seen in FMNIST (Figure 6) and CIFAR-10
(Figure 7).

(a) Gaussian Attack

(c) Krum Attack

Runtime. In general, we see that providing robustness in the
malicious context should require more runtime than in the
semi-honest. This is because extra operations for verification
are taken, e.g., using HHF to verify whether a received
aggregation is correct. The unoptimized ResNet-18 takes 3.15s
per round in the semi-honest context while costing 70.74s
(approx. an increase of 22 times) in the malicious minority.
ResNet-18 has more model parameters than LeNet, leading to
extra computational operations on cryptographic tools, which
can be seen, in the malicious context, 70.74s v.s. 14.41s. By
binary SS and polynomial transformation, Table V shows that
the runtime of LeNet and ResNet-18 are reduced by 68.75%
(4.54s) and 66.05% (24.03s), respectively, under maliciousminority servers.

(b) Label Flipping Attack

Communication costs. Similar to runtime, malicious-minority
servers consume a considerable amount of communication
cost compared to semi-honest ones. Table V shows that after
optimization, the communication costs drop to 33% in the malicious minority and 10.83% in the semi-honest with ResNet18. In the worse case, we consume 15,572.68MB bandwidth
per round under malicious minority, but we optimize the cost
to 5,151.18MB. In the semi-honest context, LeNet achieves the
best performance, requiring 16MB with optimization, which is
30.19% of the unoptimized cost (53.46MB).

(d) Trim Attack

Under the same contexts, we present the overheads of the
client side for FL training in Table V. Note the use of advanced
FL techniques, such as those outlined in [31], [30], can be
employed to enhance computing and communication efficiency
in MUDGUARD. Since applying those is straightforward, we will
not go into further detail on this matter.
(e) Adaptive Attack

(f) Backdoor Attack

VI.

C ONCLUSION

We propose a novel Byzantine-robust and privacypreserving FL system. To defend against malicious majority
clients, we introduce Model Segmentation. Leveraging cryptographic tools and DP, our design enables training to be performed correctly without breaching privacy. Our experimental
results demonstrate that the proposed protocol effectively deals
with various malicious settings and outperforms most existing
solutions. In addition to theoretical and empirical analysis,
we also provide extensive discussions on model accuracy,
advantages of MUDGUARD, and its limitations. Due to page
limits, please refer to Appendix I.

(g) Edge-case Attack

Fig. 3: Comparison with Byzantine-robust methods by ξ =
0.1 − 0.9.

R EFERENCES
[1]

M. Abadi, A. Chu, I. Goodfellow, H. B. McMahan, I. Mironov,
K. Talwar, and L. Zhang, “Deep learning with differential privacy,”
in CCS, 2016, pp. 308–318.
[2] T. Araki, A. Barak, J. Furukawa, M. Keller, Y. Lindell, K. Ohara, and
H. Tsuchida, “Generalizing the spdz compiler for other protocols,” in
CCS, 2018.
[3] E. Bagdasaryan, A. Veit, Y. Hua, D. Estrin, and V. Shmatikov, “How
to backdoor federated learning,” in AISTATS, 2020, pp. 2938–2948.

B. Evaluation on Overheads
We conduct overheads assessment together with the evaluation of accuracy. The overheads presented in Table V
capture the runtime and communication costs incurred by
the implemented cryptographic tools on the server side and
12

Server-side

Threat Model

Client-side

Semi-honest

Malicious Minority

Semi-honest

Malicious Majority

Traning Model

LeNet

ResNet-18

LeNet

ResNet-18

LeNet

ResNet-18

LeNet

ResNet-18

Runtime(Second)
Communication Costs (MB)

0.43±0.07/1.3±0.12
16.20/53.46

1.28±0.25/3.15±0.31
34.82/314.45

4.54±0.84/14.41±1.49
873.23/2776.38

24.03±2.83/70.74±2.83
5151.18/15572.68

14.33±0.74
16.34

23.71±3.45
758.48

14.56±1.61
16.34

23.93 ±4.31
758.48

TABLE V: Comparison of overheads among different threat models over LeNet & ResNet-18. The results on the server side are
in the form of "optimized/unoptimized".

[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]
[8]

[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]
[20]

[21]

[22]
[23]

[24]

G. Baruch, M. Baruch, and Y. Goldberg, “A little is enough: Circumventing defenses for distributed learning,” in NIPS, 2019.
M. Bellare, V. T. Hoang, and P. Rogaway, “Foundations of garbled
circuits,” in CCS, 2012, pp. 784–796.
J. Bernstein, Y.-X. Wang, K. Azizzadenesheli, and A. Anandkumar,
“signsgd: Compressed optimisation for non-convex problems,” in ICML,
2018, pp. 560–569.
J.-P. Berrut and L. N. Trefethen, “Barycentric lagrange interpolation,”
SIAM review, pp. 501–517, 2004.
A. N. Bhagoji, S. Chakraborty, P. Mittal, and S. Calo, “Analyzing
federated learning through an adversarial lens,” in ICML, 2019, pp.
634–643.
B. Biggio, B. Nelson, and P. Laskov, “Poisoning attacks against support
vector machines,” in ICML, 2012, pp. 1467–1474.
P. Blanchard, E. M. El Mhamdi, R. Guerraoui, and J. Stainer, “Machine
learning with adversaries: Byzantine tolerant gradient descent,” in NIPS,
2017, pp. 118–128.
K. Bonawitz, V. Ivanov, B. Kreuter, A. Marcedone, H. B. McMahan,
S. Patel, D. Ramage, A. Segal, and K. Seth, “Practical secure aggregation for privacy-preserving machine learning,” in CCS, 2017, pp. 1175–
1191.
L. Bottou, “Large-scale machine learning with stochastic gradient
descent,” in COMPSTAT, 2010, pp. 177–186.
R. J. Campello, D. Moulavi, and J. Sander, “Density-based clustering
based on hierarchical density estimates,” in PAKDD, 2013, pp. 160–172.
R. Canetti, “Universally composable security: A new paradigm for
cryptographic protocols,” in FOCS, 2001, pp. 136–145.
X. Cao, M. Fang, J. Liu, and N. Z. Gong, “Fltrust: Byzantine-robust
federated learning via trust bootstrapping,” in NDSS, 2021.
A. Dalskov, D. Escudero, and M. Keller, “Fantastic four:honest-majority
four-party secure computation with malicious security,” in USENIX
Security, 2021, pp. 2183–2200.
I. Damgård, D. Escudero, T. Frederiksen, M. Keller, P. Scholl, and
N. Volgushev, “New primitives for actively-secure mpc over rings with
applications to private machine learning,” in IEEE S&P, 2019, pp.
1102–1120.
I. Damgård, M. Keller, E. Larraia, V. Pastro, P. Scholl, and N. P. Smart,
“Practical covertly secure mpc for dishonest majority–or: breaking the
spdz limits,” in ESORICS, 2013, pp. 1–18.
I. Damgård, V. Pastro, N. Smart, and S. Zakarias, “Multiparty computation from somewhat homomorphic encryption,” in CRYPTO, 2012.
I. Dayan, H. R. Roth, A. Zhong, A. Harouni, A. Gentili, A. Z. Abidin,
A. Liu, A. B. Costa, B. J. Wood, C.-S. Tsai et al., “Federated learning
for predicting clinical outcomes in patients with covid-19,” Nature
medicine, pp. 1735–1743, 2021.
A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai,
T. Unterthiner, M. Dehghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly et al.,
“An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition
at scale,” in ICLR, 2021.
C. Dwork, “Differential privacy: A survey of results,” in TAMC, 2008,
pp. 1–19.
T. ElGamal, “A public key cryptosystem and a signature scheme based
on discrete logarithms,” IEEE transactions on information theory, pp.
469–472, 1985.
M. Ester, H.-P. Kriegel, J. Sander, X. Xu et al., “A density-based
algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise.”
in kdd, 1996, pp. 226–231.

13

[25]

M. Fang, X. Cao, J. Jia, and N. Gong, “Local model poisoning attacks
to {Byzantine-Robust} federated learning,” in USENIX Security, 2020,
pp. 1605–1622.

[26]

D. Fiore, R. Gennaro, and V. Pastro, “Efficiently verifiable computation
on encrypted data,” in CCS, 2014, pp. 844–855.

[27]

J. Furukawa, Y. Lindell, A. Nof, and O. Weinstein, “High-throughput
secure three-party computation for malicious adversaries and an honest
majority,” in EUROCRYPT, 2017, pp. 225–255.

[28]

J. Geiping, H. Bauermeister, H. Dröge, and M. Moeller, “Inverting
gradients - how easy is it to break privacy in federated learning?” in
NIPS, 2020, pp. 16 937–16 947.

[29]

C. Gentry, A fully homomorphic encryption scheme, 2009.

[30]

A. Ghosh, J. Chung, D. Yin, and K. Ramchandran, “An efficient
framework for clustered federated learning,” in NIPS, 2020, pp. 19 586–
19 597.

[31]

J. Hamer, M. Mohri, and A. T. Suresh, “FedBoost: A communicationefficient algorithm for federated learning,” in ICML, 2020, pp. 3973–
3983.

[32]

K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” in CVPR, 2016.

[33]

M. Keller, “Mp-spdz: A versatile framework for multi-party computation,” in CCS, 2020, pp. 1575–1590.

[34]

D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
in ICLR, 2015.

[35]

N. Koti, M. Pancholi, A. Patra, and A. Suresh, “{SWIFT}: Superfast and robust {Privacy-Preserving} machine learning,” in USENIX
Security, 2021, pp. 2651–2668.

[36]

A. Krizhevsky, G. Hinton et al., “Learning multiple layers of features
from tiny images,” 2009.

[37]

K. Kumari, P. Rieger, H. Fereidooni, M. Jadliwala, and A. Sadeghi,
“Baybfed: Bayesian backdoor defense for federated learning,” in IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), 2023.

[38]

Y. LeCun, B. Boser, J. S. Denker, D. Henderson, R. E. Howard,
W. Hubbard, and L. D. Jackel, “Backpropagation applied to handwritten
zip code recognition,” Neural computation, pp. 541–551, 1989.

[39]

Y. LeCun and C. Cortes, “MNIST handwritten digit database,” 2010.
[Online]. Available: http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/

[40]

R. Lehmkuhl, P. Mishra, A. Srinivasan, and R. A. Popa, “Muse: Secure
inference resilient to malicious clients,” in USENIX Security, 2021, pp.
2201–2218.

[41]

Y. Lindell and A. Nof, “A framework for constructing fast mpc over
arithmetic circuits with malicious adversaries and an honest-majority,”
in CCS, 2017, pp. 259–276.

[42]

X. Luo, Y. Wu, X. Xiao, and B. C. Ooi, “Feature inference attack on
model predictions in vertical federated learning,” in ICDE, 2021, pp.
181–192.

[43]

B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas,
“Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
data,” in AISTATS, 2017, pp. 1273–1282.

[44]

E. M. E. Mhamdi, R. Guerraoui, and S. Rouault, “The hidden vulnerability of distributed learning in byzantium,” in ICML, 2018, pp.
3521–3530.

[45]

P. Mohassel and P. Rindal, “Aby3: A mixed protocol framework for
machine learning,” in CCS, 2018, pp. 35–52.

[46]

P. Mohassel and Y. Zhang, “Secureml: A system for scalable privacypreserving machine learning,” in IEEE S&P, 2017, pp. 19–38.

[47]

[48]
[49]

[50]
[51]

[52]
[53]

[54]
[55]
[56]
[57]

[58]

[59]

[60]

[61]

[62]
[63]
[64]

[65]

Notation

M. Nasr, R. Shokri, and A. Houmansadr, “Comprehensive privacy
analysis of deep learning: Passive and active white-box inference attacks
against centralized and federated learning,” in IEEE S&P, 2019, pp.
739–753.
M. Nasr, R. Shokri, and A. houmansadr, “Improving deep learning with
differential privacy using gradient encoding and denoising,” 2020.
T. D. Nguyen, P. Rieger, H. Chen, H. Yalame, H. Möllering,
H. Fereidooni, S. Marchal, M. Miettinen, A. Mirhoseini, S. Zeitouni,
F. Koushanfar, A.-R. Sadeghi, and T. Schneider, “Flame: Taming
backdoors in federated learning,” in USENIX Security, 2022.
P. Paillier, “Public-key cryptosystems based on composite degree residuosity classes,” in EUROCRYPT, 1999, pp. 223–238.
A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan,
T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga et al., “Pytorch: An
imperative style, high-performance deep learning library,” NIPS, pp.
8026–8037, 2019.
M. O. Rabin, “How to exchange secrets with oblivious transfer.” IACR
Cryptol. ePrint Arch., 2005.
M. S. Riazi, M. Samragh, H. Chen, K. Laine, K. Lauter, and F. Koushanfar, “{XONN}: Xnor-based oblivious deep neural network inference,”
in USENIX Security, 2019, pp. 1501–1518.
D. Rotaru and T. Wood, “Marbled circuits: Mixing arithmetic and
boolean circuits with active security,” 2019.
A. Roy Chowdhury, C. Guo, S. Jha, and L. van der Maaten, “Eiffel:
Ensuring integrity for federated learning,” in CCS, 2022, pp. 2535–2549.
A. Shamir, “How to share a secret,” Communications of the ACM, pp.
612–613, 1979.
S. Truex, N. Baracaldo, A. Anwar, T. Steinke, H. Ludwig, R. Zhang, and
Y. Zhou, “A hybrid approach to privacy-preserving federated learning,”
in AISec, 2019, pp. 1–11.
H. Wang, K. Sreenivasan, S. Rajput, H. Vishwakarma, S. Agarwal, J.y. Sohn, K. Lee, and D. Papailiopoulos, “Attack of the tails: Yes, you
really can backdoor federated learning,” in NIPS, 2020.
H. Wang, K. Sreenivasan, S. Rajput, H. Vishwakarma, S. Agarwal,
J. Sohn, K. Lee, and D. S. Papailiopoulos, “Attack of the tails: Yes,
you really can backdoor federated learning,” in NIPS, 2020.
N. Wu, F. Farokhi, D. Smith, and M. A. Kaafar, “The value of
collaboration in convex machine learning with differential privacy,” in
IEEE S&P, 2020, pp. 304–317.
H. Xiao, K. Rasul, and R. Vollgraf, “Fashion-mnist: a novel image
dataset for benchmarking machine learning algorithms,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.
C. Xie, K. Huang, P.-Y. Chen, and B. Li, “Dba: Distributed backdoor
attacks against federated learning,” in ICLR, 2020.
C. Xie, S. Koyejo, and I. Gupta, “Zeno++: Robust fully asynchronous
sgd,” in ICML, 2020, pp. 10 495–10 503.
D. Yin, Y. Chen, R. Kannan, and P. Bartlett, “Byzantine-robust distributed learning: Towards optimal statistical rates,” in ICML, 2018, pp.
5650–5659.
L. Zhu, Z. Liu, and S. Han, “Deep leakage from gradients,” NIPS, 2019.

git
wit
T
n
S
m
ki
c
l
E
Di
η
Gz
[n]
[[·]]
CosM
EudM
IndM
δ, ϕ
∆, σ, ϵ
N
α
ECD(·)
DCD(·)

Description
gradients of i-th client at t-th round
weights of i-th client at t-th round
the number of rounds
the number of clients
the number of servers
the number of malicious clients
the number of data instances of i-th client
the number of clusters
the cluster labels
the number of epochs
the dataset of i-th client
learning rate
the aggregation of gradients of z-th cluster
a set of numbers ranging from 1 to n
secret shared format
pairwise adjusted cosine similarity matrix
pairwise L2 distance matrix
indicator matrix
secret keys of homomorphic hash function
parameters of differential privacy
Gaussian noise
density parameter
encoding algorithm
decoding algorithm

TABLE VI: Notation summary

Algorithm 1: MUDGUARD.
Input: training dataset D =
i

n
S

Di

i=1

Output: global models {w | i ∈ [n]}
ServerAggregation:
2 Initialize global model w0
3 for each global epoch t = 1,2,· · · ,T do
4
for client i ∈ n in parallel do
5
[[git ]] ← ClientUpdate(i, wit−1 )
6
end
7
[[Gjt ]] ←Algorithm 2
8
return [[Gjt ]], Hδ,ϕ ([[Gjt ]]) to clients
9 end
i
10 ClientUpdate(i, wt−1 ):
11 B ←(split Di into batches of size b)
12 IndM ←MajorityVote({IndMi | i ∈ [s]})
13 l ←DBSCAN(IndM)
i
i
14 reconstruct Gt−1 by [[Gt−1 ]]
Q
i
15 if
Hδ,ϕ (ĝt−1 ) = Hδ,ϕ (Git−1 ) then
16
accept and continue
17 else
18
refuse and break
19 end
i
i
i
20 wt ← wt−1 − η · sign(Gt−1 )
i
i
21 gt ←LocalTraining(wt ; batch; loss)
eit ← git / max(1, ||git ||2 /∆) + N (0, ∆2 σ 2 )
22 g
i
eit
23 ĝt ← KS(e
git , N ) · g
i
i
24 gt ← ECD(sign(ĝt ))
i
25 send [[gt ]] to servers
i
26 broadcast Hδ,ϕ (sign(ĝt ))
1

A PPENDIX
A. Notation
The frequently used notations are in Table VI.
B. Implementation Algorithms
In the evaluation, we implement the proposed MUDGUARD
(with optimization) mainly based on Algorithms 1 and 2.
C. Tools

to a parametric server. It aims to optimize a loss function:
n
P
ki
arg min
K Li (w, Di ), where Li (·) and ki are the loss

1) Federated Learning: Federated Learning (FL) enables
n clients to train a global model w collaboratively without revealing local datasets. Unlike centralized learning, FL requires
clients to upload the weights of local models ({wi | i ∈ n})

function and local data size of i-th client. At t-th round, the
training of FL can usually be divided into the following steps.
• Global model download: The server selects partial clients
engaging in training. All connected clients download the global

w

14

i=1

derive plaintexts.

Algorithm 2: Secure clustering.
Input: shares of gradients: {[[git ]] | i ∈ [n]}
Output: shares of aggregation {[[Gzt ]] | z ∈ c}

Secret Sharing (SS). It refers to a type of tool for splitting
a secret among multiple parties, each of whom is assigned
a share of the secret. The security of an SS scheme guarantees that one can distinguish shares and randoms with a
negligible probability. Apart from that, no one can reconstruct
the secret unless holding all (or a subset) of shares. Let us
consider Shamir Secret Sharing (SSS) [56] (t, n)-threshold
scheme asPan example. Assume one chooses a polynomial
t−1
i
f (x) =
i=0 ai · x over Zq and a secret a0 = f (0).
The secret can be split into n shares by randomly selecting
n values: {rj ← Z∗q | j ∈ n}, and then calculating
shares {f (rj ) | j ∈ n}. Given a subset of any t out
of n shares, the secret P
can by reconstructed
by Lagrange
Qt−1
t−1
z
interpolation [7]:f (0) = j=0 f (rj )· z=0,z̸=j rzr−r
. Except
j
for SSS, other schemes like additive SS and replicated SS are
used in the MPC framework [33], [18]. Note these schemes
have a linear property. Even if each party performs linear
combinations locally with shares, the combined secret matches
the result obtained by these linear calculations. This saves
significant communication costs in the FL context, where
servers are only required to aggregate shares of gradients.
Homomorphic Hash Functions (HHF). Given a message
x ∈ Zq , a collision-resistant HHF [26] H: G1 × G2 ← Zq
′
′
can be indicated as H(x) = (g Hδ,ϕ (x) , hHδ,ϕ (x) ), where δ
and ϕ are secret
keys randomly and independently selected
′
from Zq . H is a hash function, and G1 and G2 are two
different groups. Similar to other one-way hash functions, the
security of the HHF requires that one can find a collision with
a negligible probability.
Based
on additive
homomorphism:
′
′
′
′
H(x1 + x2 ) ← (g Hδ,ϕ (x1 )+Hδ,ϕ (x2 ) , hHδ,ϕ (x1 )+Hδ,ϕ (x2 ) ), in this
work, we will use this tool as a verification of the correctness
of aggregation.

for each i, j ∈ n do
[[dot_productij ]] ← [[git ]] ⊕ [[gjt ]]
3
convert binary sharing ([[dot_productij ]], [[git ]]) to
arithmetic sharing by
PB2A
2
[[dot_productij ]]
4
[[CosMij ]] ← 1 − np
5 end
6 for each i, j ∈ n do
7
[[xij ]] ← ([[CosMi ]] − [[CosMj ]])2
1

2

8
9
10
11
12
13

[[x

]]−1

[[EucMij ]] ← 1 + ij2
if EucMij ≤ α then
[[IndMij ]] == [[1]]
else
[[IndMij ]] == [[0]]
end

−

([[xij ]]−1)2
([[x ]]−1)3
+ ij16
8

end
reconstruct IndM
16 each server broadcasts IndM
17 l ← DBSCAN(IndM)
18 for each z ∈ c all servers in parallel do
P
19
[[Gzt ]] ← li =z DCD([[git ]]), i ∈ n
20
return [[Gzt ]] to clients {i | li = z}
21 end
14
15

model wt−1 from the server.
• Local training: Each client updates its local model by
t−1 ,Di )
training with its own dataset: git−1 ← ∂L(w
.
∂wt−1
• Aggregation: After the local updates {git−1 | i ∈ n} are
uploaded, the server updates the global model by aggregation:
n
P
ki i
wt ← wt−1 − η
K gt−1 , where η refers to the learning rate.
i=1

2) DBSCAN: Unlike traditional clustering algorithms (e.g.,
k-means, k-means++, bi-kmeans), which need to pre-define
the number of clusters, Density-Based Spatial Clustering of
Applications with Noise (DBSCAN) [24] is proposed to cluster
data points dynamically. Based on density-based clustering,
DBSCAN guarantees that clusters of any shape can always be
identified. Besides, it can recognize noise points effectively.
Basically, after setting the density parameter (α) and the
minimum cluster size (mP ts), DBSCAN can conduct effective
clustering. We note HDBSCAN [13] could be also used for
clustering. Its main difference from DBSCAN is the multiple
densities clustering. In this work, we assume that malicious
clients may only conduct one kind of attack during the whole
training, e.g., a group of malicious clients conducting a Label
Flipping Attack together. The malicious updates could only
derive one density. Like [49], we may apply HDBSCAN
in the clustering. But DBSCAN, in general, requires less
computational complexity than HDBSCAN in algorithmic
constructions. And further, we will conduct the clustering with
cryptographic operations. Considering efficiency, we choose
DBSCAN over HDBSCAN.

Homomorphic Encryption (HE). This tool is an interesting
privacy-preserving technology enabling users to evaluate polynomial computations on ciphertexts without revealing underlying plaintexts. An encryption scheme is called partial HE if it
only supports addition [50] or multiplication [23], while fully
HE [29] can support both. An HE scheme usually includes the
following steps.
• Key Generation: (pk, sk) ← KGen (1λ ), where based on
security level parameter λ, public key pk and secret key sk
can be generated.
• Encryption: (c1 , c2 ) ← Enc(pk, m1 , m2 ). By using pk, the
probabilistic algorithm encrypts messages m1 , m2 to ciphertexts c1 , c2 .
• Homomorphic evaluation: Eval(c1 , c2 ) = c1 ◦ c2 =
Enc(pk, m1 )◦Enc(pk, m2 ) = Enc(pk, m1 ◦m2 ), where ◦ refers
to an operator, e.g., addition or multiplication.
• Decryption: m1 ◦ m2 ← Dec(sk, Enc(pk, m1 ◦ m2 )). Using
sk, the operational results of m1 and m2 can be derived.
Oblivious Transfer (OT). OT [52] is one of the crucial
building blocks for MPC. In an OT protocol (involving two
parties), a sender holds n different strings si , i = 1 · · · n, and
a receiver has an index (ind) and wants to learn sind . At the
end of the protocol, the receiver cannot get information about
strings rather than sind , while the sender learns nothing about
ind selected by the receiver. For example, a 1-out-of-2 OT
protocol only inputs two strings and a 1-bit index.

3) Cryptographic Tools: The secure Multiparty Computation (MPC) framework aims to enable multiple parties to
evaluate a function over ciphertexts securely. The parties
conducting MPC can access inputs via protection approaches,
e.g., in a secret-shared format. It does not leak any information
besides the final output unless these shares are combined to
15

Garbled Circuits (GC) [5]. The protocol is run between two
parties called the garbler and evaluator. The garbler generates
the GC corresponding to the Boolean circuit to be evaluated
securely by associating two random keys per wire representing
the bit values 0, 1. The garbler then sends the GC together
with the keys for the inputs to the evaluator. The evaluator
obliviously obtains the keys for his inputs via OT and evaluates
the circuit to obtain the output key. Finally, the evaluator maps
the output key to the real output.

E. Security Analysis
We first define the ideal functionality FMUDGUARD to execute a byzantine-robust privacy-preserving FL, and then show
that the proposed protocol ΠMUDGUARD securely realizes the
functionality. Our security is based on the random oracle model
where the homomorphic hash function outputs a uniformly
random value for a new query and the same value for a
previously answered query, hence we prove the UC security in
FRO -hybrid model. Besides, the security is also based on the
existence of a secret sharing protocol where the clients derive
shares indistinguishable with randoms which securely realizes
FSS (a combination of Ftriples , Fshare , Freconst [27]), and a bitto-arithmetic conversion protocol that securely realizes FB2A
(noted as FPREP in [54]).

4) Differential Privacy: Differential Privacy (DP) [22] is
a data protection approach enabling one to publish statistical
information of datasets while keeping individual data private.
The security of DP requires that adversaries cannot statistically distinguish the changes between two datasets where an
arbitrary data point is different. The most widely used DP
mechanism is called (ϵ, δ)-DP defined below, requiring less
injection noise than the ϵ-DP but standing at the same privacy
level.

Ideal Functionality Fshare
The functionality Fshare interacts with a dealer party Pj ,
and a corrupted party Pi .

Definition 1 ((ϵ, δ) - Differential Privacy [22]). Given two
real positive numbers (ϵ, δ) and a randomized algorithm A:
Dn → Y, the algorithm A provides (ϵ, δ) - DP if for all data
′
sets D, D ∈ Dn differing in only one data′ sample, and all
S ⊆ Y: P r[A(D) ∈ S] ≤ exp(ϵ) · P r[A(D ) ∈ S] + δ.

Upon receiving (ti , si ) from the corrupted party Pi ,
and receiving v from the dealer Pj , the functionality Fshare computes (tj+1 , sj+1 ) and (tj+2 , sj+2 ) from
(ti , si ) and v, and sends the honest Pi−1 and Pi+1 their
respective shares.

Note that the Gaussian noise N ∼ N (0, ∆2 σ 2 ) should
be added to the outputpof the algorithm, where ∆ is L2
sensitivity of D and σ= 2 ln(1.25/δ) [1]. The robustness of
post-processing guarantees for any probabilistic/deterministic
functions F, if A satisfies (ϵ, δ)-DP, so does F(A).

Ideal Functionality Freconst
The functionality Freconst interacts with an adversary
Sim and a corrupted party Pi , and receives information
from Pi+1 and Pi+2 .

D. Complexity Analysis
We use d to denote the dimension of the model. n, S and c
refer to the number of clients, servers and clusters, respectively.
• Computation cost. Each client’s computation cost can be
computed as binary SS with Tiny OT − O(d). The server’s
computation cost consists of 4 parts: (1) computing pairwise
XOR − O(n2 ); (2) bit to arithmetic conversion − O(d); (3)
multiplication for L2 distance − O(n3 ); (4) comparison with α
− O(n2 ); (5) calculating results of HHF based on the number
of clusters c − O(nc). Thus, the total computation complexity
of each server is O(n3 ).
• Communication cost. For a client in MUDGUARD, the
communication cost can be divided into 2 parts: (1) sending
updates to S servers with binary SS and Tiny OT − O(Sd);
(2) broadcasting hash results of updates to the rest of parties
− O(n + S). Thus, we have communication complexity
− O(Sd + n) for each client. The servers’ communication
costs include (1) receiving correlated randomness and doublyauthenticated bits for converting a boolean shared matrix to
arithmetic one − O(n2 ); (2) receiving triples for multiplications − O(n2 ); (3) receiving correlated randomness for
element-wise comparison − O(n2 ); (4) sending shares and
a random bit to other servers for reconstruction − O(Sn2 );
(5) sending aggregated shares and values of HHF to all
clients − O(nd). Overall, the communication cost for every
server is O(Sn2 ). For detailed experimental results, refer to
Section V-B.

Upon receiving (ti+1 , si+1 , j) from Pi+1 and
(ti+2 , si+2 , j) from Pi+2 , Freconst computes v = si+2 ⊕
ti+1 and sends v to Pj . In addition, the functionality
Freconst sends (ti , si ) to the adversary Sim, where (ti , si )
is Pi ’s share as defined by the shares received from the
honest parties.

Ideal Functionality Ftriples
The functionality Ftriples interacts with a corrupted
party Pi , and receive information from P1 , P2 , P3 .
Upon
receiving
N
triples
of
pairs
{(tjai , sjai ), (tjbi , sjbi ), (tjci , sjci )}N
from
P
,
the
i
j=1
functionality first Ftriples chooses random aj , bj ∈ {0, 1}
and computes aj bj , and then defines a vector of sharings
d = ([aj ], [bj ], [cj ]), for j = 1, ..., N . The sharings are
computed from [(tjai , sjai ), (tjbi , sjbi ), (tjci , sjci )] provided
by Pi and the chosen aj , bj , cj . Next, Ftriples sends the
generated shares to each corresponding party.

16

continue. Otherwise, send (Abort, sid) to all honest parties, and ignore all further messages to FMPC with the
same sid.

Ideal Functionality FPrep (FB2A )
Independent copies of FMPC are identified via session
identifiers sid. For each instance, FPrep maintains a dictionary Dicsid . If a party provides input with an invalid sid,
the FPrep outputs reject to all parties and await another
message.

Remark. We use Fshare as the secret share generating algorithm, Freconst as the reconstructing algorithm, Ftriples as the
secret share multiplication algorithm, and FB2A (see FPREP
in [54]) as the bit to arithmetic conversion algorithm.

Upon receiving (Init, F, sid) from all parties, initialize a new database of secrets Dicsid indexed by a set
Dicsid .Keys and store the field Fas Dicsid .Field, if sid
is a new session identifier. Set the flag Abortsid = FALSE.

We formally define FMUDGUARD as follows.

Upon receiving (Input, i, id, x, sid) from a party Pi
and (Input, i, id, ⊥, sid) from all other parties, if id ∈
/
Dicsid .Keys then insert it and set Dicsid [id] = x. Then
execute the procedure Wait.

Ideal Functionality FMUDGUARD
The functionality FMUDGUARD is parameterized with a
DBSCAN algorithm with corresponding parameters, a
local training SGD algorithm with appropriate variables,
Gauss noise parameters ∆ and σ, and the density parameter α. The functionality FMUDGUARD interacts with
n clients P1 , ..., Pn , s remote servers S1 , ..., Ss , and an
ideal adversary Sim.

Upon receiving (Add, idx , idy , id, sid), set Dicsid [id] =
Dicsid [idx ] + Dicsid [idy ] if idx , idy ∈ Dicsid .Keys.
Upon
receiving
(Mult, idx , idy , id, sid),
set Dicsid [id]
=
Dicsid [idx ] · Dicsid [idy ], if
idx , idy ∈ Dicsid .Keys. Then execute the procedure
Wait.

Upon receiving (Init, {w0i }i∈[n] , {Gi0 }i∈[n] ) from the
adversary Sim, send (Init, w0i , Gi0 ) to each Pi .

Upon receiving (RanEle, id, sid), set Dicsid [id] to a
random element in Dicsid .Field, if id ∈
/ Dicsid .Keys. Then
execute the procedure Wait.

i
Upon receiving (Update, t, wt−1
, Di ) from each honi
i
i
est client Pi , calculate wt , gt , g̃t , ĝit , ḡit , and store (t, [[ḡit ]])
for each server, and notify Sim with (Update, t, Pi ). If
t = T , terminate the protocol. Later, when Sim replies
with (Update-data, t), send (Update, t) to each server Sj
i
for each j ∈ [s]. Upon receiving (Update, t, {[[ḡ′ t ]]}i∈I )
from Sim for all corrupted client index i, where I ⊂ [n],
i
store (t, [[ḡ′ t ]]) for each honest server.

Upon receiving (RanBit, id, sid), set Dicsid [id] to a
random bit if id ∈
/ Dicsid .Keys. Then execute the procedure Wait.
Upon receiving (Open, i , id, sid) from all parties,
if id ∈ Dicsid .Keys: 1) if i = 0, send Dicsid [id] to the
adversary and executes Wait. If the answer is (OK, sid),
await an error ϵ from the adversary. Send Dicsid [id] + ϵ to
all honest parties. If ϵ ̸= 0, set the flag Abortsid = TRUE.
2) if i ∈ A, then send Dicsid [id] to the adversary. Then
execute Wait. 3) if i ∈ [n]\A, execute Wait. If not
already halted, then await an error ϵ from the adversary.
Send Dicsid [id] + ϵ to party Pi . If ϵ ̸= 0, set the flag
Abortsid = TRUE.

Upon receiving (Update, t) from a server Sj , if
(t, [[ḡit ]]) is stored for each i ∈ [n] and for each
server, calculate IndM and {[[Gzt ]]}z∈[c] for each server.
Then send (Model, t, IndM, {[[Gzt ]]}z∈[c] ) to each server.
If Sj is honest, upon receiving (Update-model, t)
from the simulator Sim, send (Update-model, t, [[Gzt ]])
to the corresponding ′client. Otherwise, upon receiving
(Update-model, t, {[[Gtz ]]}) from the simulator Sim, send
′
(Update-model, t, [[Gtz ]]) to corresponding client.

Upon receiving (Check, sid) from all parties, execute
the procedure Wait. If not already halted and Abortsid =
TRUE , send (Abort, sid) to the adversary and all honest
parties, and ignore further messages to FMPC with the
same sid. Otherwise, send (OK, sid) and continue.

Upon receiving (Abort) from either the adversary or
any client, send ⊥ to all parties and terminate.

Upon receiving (daBits, id1 , ..., idl , sid1 , sid2 ) from
all parties where idi ∈
/ Dicsid .Keys for all i ∈ [l],
await a message OK or Abort from the adversary. If
OK is received, sample a set of random bit {bj }j ∈
[l], and for each j ∈ [l] set Dicsid1 [idj ] = bj
and Dicsid2 [idj ] = bj , and insert the set {idi }i∈[l]
into Dicsid1 .Keys and Dicsid2 .Keys. Otherwise, send
(Abort, sid1 ) and (Abort, sid2 ) to the adversary and all
honest parties, and ignore all further messages to FMPC )
with the same sid1 and sid2 .

Remark. According to the ideal functionality, we could capture not only privacy but also soundness against malicious
corruption of servers. However, the differential attack is based
on the output of each epoch, which is published roundly and
could be obtained legally. Hence, the discussion on differential
privacy is not included in this security definition. Detailed
proof for differential privacy will be given later. Moreover,
soundness against malicious corruption of clients is also not
captured by the previous definition since such security is
protected by the clustering technique, which is not the concern
of cryptography.

Procedure Wait: Await a message (OK, sid) or
(Abort, sid) from the adversary. If OK is received, then

Definition 2 (Universally Composable security). A protocol Π
17

UC-realizes ideal functionality F if for any PPT adversary
A there exists a PPT simulator S such that, for any PPT environment E, the ensembles EXECΠ,A,E and EXECIDEALF ,S,E
are indistinguishable.

since the latter two are the input/output pair of the elementwise comparison algorithm computed by a secure comparison
algorithm in our protocol. Fortunately, the privacy of a secure comparison algorithm guarantees the indistinguishability
between real and ideal input/output pairs. Hence, we claim
that if there exists a distinguisher that could tell the difference
between the real and ideal world, it contradicts either the UC
security of FSS or the privacy of secure comparison protocol.

Definition 3 (UC security of MUDGUARD). A protocol
ΠMUDGUARD is UC-secure if ΠMUDGUARD UC-realizes F,
against malicious-majority clients and malicious-minority
servers, considering arbitrary collusion between malicious
parties.

Case 4: If there exists both corrupted clients and servers. The
situation, in this case, is simply the combination of Case 2 and
3 since there is no extra view needed to simulate.

Theorem 3 (UC security of MUDGUARD). Suppose the existence of a homomorphic hash function in a random oracle
model, our protocol is UC-secure in (FRO , FSS , FB2A )-hybrid
world.

In summary, for any PPT adversary A we could construct
a Sim, so that for any PPT environment E, the EXECΠ,A,E
and EXECFMUDGUARD ,S,E are indistinguishable.

Proof: We show the validity of the theorem by proving that the protocol ΠMUDGUARD securely realizes F
in the (FRO , FSS , FB2A )-hybrid world against any corruption pattern. We construct a simulator Sim for any nonFRO ,FSS ,FB2A
uniform PPT environment E such that EXECΠ
≈
MUDGUARD ,A,E
EXECFMUDGUARD ,Sim,Z . The Sim is constructed as follows.

UC framework captures attacks on input and intermediate
data. On the contrary, differential privacy prevents the adversary from inferring about private information from outputs
or updates, and such information might also be utilized by
malicious clients. When false positives clustering exists, or
malicious clients pretend to be honest, local updates have a
chance to be revealed to the adversary. The following theorem
shows that these updates do not leak any individual data due
to differential privacy.

It writes on A’s input tape upon receiving an input value
from E, as if coming from E, and writes on Z’s output tape
upon receiving an output value from A, as if from A.
Case 1: If all clients and servers are not corrupted. Since we
assume private channels between client and server, Sim could
just simply randomly choose all intermediate values. There is
no distinguisher who could tell the difference between random
values and real transcripts.

Theorem 4. No adversary in corrupted client set Ac ⊂ C,
where |Ac | ≤ n − 1, can retrieve the individual values of
honest clients.
Proof: Since we apply differential privacy [22], the local
updates cannot leak information regarding the inputs. According to Def. 1, the added differentially private noise guarantees
that the aggregation is indistinguishable whether an individual
update participates or not. Therefore, it guarantees the security
of individual local updates while aggregation can be calculated.

Case 2: If corrupted clients exist. We note the corrupted subset
as I ⊂ [n]. We need to simulate the adversary’s view, which is
the secret share and its corresponding hash value. For t ∈ [T ]
i
and i ∈ I, the simulator randomly chosen ḡ′ t ← {0, 1}, and
i
internally executes FSS to obtain [[ḡ′ t ]]. Then, Sim internally
executes FRO to obtain Hit . Because of the UC security of FSS
and FRO , there is no distinguisher that could tell the difference
i
between ([[ḡ′ t ]], Hit ) and ([[ḡit ]], Hδ,ϕ (sign(ĝti ))).

F. Convergence Analysis

Case 3: If corrupted servers exist. We not the corrupted
subset as I ⊂ [T ]. We need to simulate the adversary’s view,
including all secret shares in the protocol. It is worth noticing
that we should not only guarantee the indistinguishability
between two groups of shares but also the relationship among
elements within each group. After obtaining IndM, the Sim
executes DBSCAN protocol on IndM and acquires cluster
labels l, and executes the functionality FSS to obtain [[IndMij ]]
for each i, j ∈ [n]. Then, Sim randomly chosen |l| secret
i
i
sharing values [[ḡ′ t ]] such that the summation Σli =z DCD([[ḡ′ t ]])
z
equals to the given share [[Gt ]]. This procedure could be easily
achieved by first randomly choosing the first |l| − 1 values and
then calculating the last value. For each i ∈
/ c, the simulator
Sim simply chooses the shares of gradients randomly since
those values are irrelevant to the calculation. After acquiring
i
all the shares of gradients [[ḡ′ t ]], the simulation Sim pairwisely
′
calculate [[dot_productij ]], and convert it to arithmetic sharing
by executing the functionality FB2A , and then calculate the
adjusted cosine similarity matrix share [[CosM′ij ]]. Next, as in
Algorithm 2, Sim calculates [[x′ij ]], [[EucM′ij ]] for each i, j ∈
[n]. We claim that all shares that were previously generated
are interdeducible, except between [[EucM′ij ]] and [[IndM′ij ]],

Let M be the total number of clients in a semi-honest
majority client cluster. Semi-honest clients and malicious
clients are indexed by {1, · · · , h} and {h + 1, · · · , h + m},
respectively, where M = h + m and h > m if TNR is greater
than 50%. The component j of stochastic gradient and of true
gradient are denoted as {g̃i,j }M
i=1 and gj respectively. An error
probability is shown as follows.
Lemma 1 (The bound of error probability with malicious clients). If the TNR (h/M) of the clustering
is h relatively
hP high, theni we have ithe error probability
p
M
P Sign
≤ Ph · O( M/h),
i=1 Sign(g̃i,j ) ̸= Sign(gj )
where Ph is the bound for the error probability without
malicious clients.
Proof: Every client is a Bernoulli trial with success
probability ph for semi-honest clients and pm for malicious
clients, respectively, to receive the true gradient signs. Let Zh
be the number of semi-honest clients with true signs, which
therefore equals the sum of h independent Bernoulli trials,
so we know Zh follows the binomial distribution B(h, ph ).
Similarly, we know the number of malicious clients with
18

correct signs Zm follows the binomial distribution B(m, pm ).
Denote qh = 1 − ph and qm = 1 − pm .

from
"
|gt |P Sign

Let Z be the total number of clients with true gradient signs, so Z = Zh + Zm . We use the Gaussian distribution to simplify the analysis. Notice that B(h, ph ) ∼
N (hph , hph qh ) and B(m, pm ) ∼ N (mpm , mpm qm ), so
we get
hPZ ∼ N (hph i+ mpm , hph qh + mpm qm ) . The event
M
Sign
̸= Sign(gj ) is equivalent to event
i=1 Sign(g̃i,j )
Z ≤ M/2. Then the error probability equals P(Z ≤ M/2).
By using Cantelli’s inequality, we know

"M
X

#

#

σi
Sign(g̃i,j ) ̸= Sign(gj ) ≤ √ .
M
i=1

(3)

As Lemma 1 proved,p
in the existence of the malicious clients,
i
·O( M/h) = O(σ√i h) . By plugging the result
we get (3)≤ √σM
into (2), we have the convergence rate of MUDGUARD:
" T −1
"
#2


1
1 X
1 p
E
∥L∥1 f0 − f∗ +
∥gt ∥1 ≤ √
T t=0
2
N
#2
p
2
+ √ ∥σ∥1 · O( M/h)
M
"

 (4)
1
1 p
∥L∥1 f0 − f∗ +
=√
2
N
#2
2
√ ∥σ∥1 .
+
O( h)

P [Z ≤ M/2] = P[Z ≥ 2(hph + mpm ) − M/2]
= P[Z − (hph + mpm ) ≥ (hph + mpm ) − M/2]
√
1
hph qh + mpm qm
≤
≤
[(hph +mpm )−M/2]2
2|(hp
h + mpm ) − M/2|
1 + hph qh +mpm qm
p
√
h/M + m/M · pm qm /ph qh
M p h qh
=
·
2M (ph − 1/2) (h/M · ph + m/M · pm − 1)/(ph − 1/2)
p
= Ph · O( M/h)
(1)
1
where the second inequality holds since x21+1 ≤ 2x
for
x > 0, and the last two equalities hold since ph > 1/2 by [6]
and we assume hph > M/2 with overwhelming probability for
a sufficient large TNR. The assumption is reasonable because
hph = M ph > M/2 if T N R = 100%. The first factor in
Eq. (1) is the bound for the error probability without malicious
p
clients, so we get the error probability less than a O( M/h)
factor of that in the case of without malicious clients.

G. Proof of Theorem 1
Proof: We denote a = (a1 , · · · , ad ) and b = (b1 , · · · , bd )
are two vectors uploaded by malicious clients, where np refers
to the number of model parameters:
1
, sign = +1
, ∀i ∈ [d].
P r(ai , bi = sign) = 12
2 , sign = −1

Let L and σ be non-negative losses and standard deviation
of stochastic gradients g̃ respectively. ∀x, the objective values
f (x) are bounded by constants f∗ (i.e. f (x) ≥ f∗ ). The
objective value of 0-th round is referred to as f0 . Under the
above conditions, the results are the following.

The adjusted cosine similarity can be computed as:
a1 b1 + · · · + ad bd
p
COS_similarity = p 2
a1 + · · · + a2d · b21 + · · · + b2d
a1 b1 + · · · + ad bd
.
=
d
Since ai and bi are relatively independent, we have:
1
, sign = +1
P r(ai · bi = sign) = 12
, ∀i ∈ [d].
2 , sign = −1

Theorem 5 (Non-convex convergence rate of MUDGUARD).
If the TNR of the clustering is relatively high, then the global
model generated in the semi-honest cluster converges at a rate
#2
"
" T −1


1 p
1 X
1
∥gt ∥1 ≤ √
E
∥L∥1 f0 − f∗ +
T t=0
2
N
#2
2
√ ∥σ∥1 ,
+
O( h)

According
to
the
Law
of
large
numbers,
E(COS_similarity) ∼ E(ai bi ) = 0. This conclusion
can be generalized to any two malicious clients, and
malicious clients have the same distance as a semi-honest
client. Therefore, if we calculate the adjusted cosine similarity
vector of two malicious clients, there should be only two
elements of difference. The L2 distance of these two vectors
√
is 2.

where N is the cumulative number of stochastic gradient calls
up to round T (i.e., N = O(T 2 )). Therefore, the higher the
rate is, the closer the convergence speed is to the case without
malicious clients.
Proof: Following the results of Theorem 2 in [6], in the
distributed SignSGD with a majority vote, we can get the nonconvex convergence rate without malicious clients at
" T −1
#2
"


1 X
1 p
1
∥gt ∥1 ≤ √
E
∥L∥1 f0 − f∗ +
T t=0
2
N
(2)
#2
2
+ √ ∥σ∥1
M

H. Other Experimental Setup and Experimental Results
1) Other Experiment Setup: We implement MUDGUARD in
C++ and Python. We use MP-SPDZ library [33] to implement
secure computations and Pytorch framework [51] for training.
All the experiments are conducted on a cluster of machines
with Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU E5-2620 v4 @ 2.10GHz and
NVIDIA 1080 Ti GPU, with 32GB RAM in a local area
network. As for the cryptographic tools, all the parameters
are set to a 128-bit security level.
19

Datasets. We use MNIST and FMNIST datasets for the image
classification task.
• MNIST [39]. It consists of 60,000 training samples and
10,000 testing samples, where each sample is a 28×28
gray-scale image of handwritten digital (0-9).
• FMNIST [61]. It contains article images from Zalando and
has the same size as MNIST, where each image is a 28×28
gray-scale image associated with a label from 10 classes.
• CIFAR-10 [36]. It offers 50,000 training samples and
10,000 test samples, where each is a 32×32 color image in a
label from 10 different objectives, and there are 6,000 images
for each class.
Classifiers. We use LeNet and ResNet-18 to perform training
and classification of the datasets.
• LeNet [38]. Containing 6 layers (including 3 convolution
layers, 2 pooling layers, and 1 fully connected layer), LeNet
aims to train 44,426 parameters for image classification.
• ResNet-18 [32]. It provides 18 layers with 11 million
trainable parameters to train color images. We use a light
vision of ResNet with approx. 2.07 million parameters and
complete the experiments with the CIFAR-10 dataset.
2) Other Experimental Results: In Figures 4 and 5, we
present the comparison of testing accuracy among baseline,
semi-honest and malicious groups under targeted attacks and
ASR between the groups under untargeted attacks. In addition,
we also give the experimental results by varying proportion of
malicious clients (ξ ≥ 0.5), #clients n and non-iid degree q in
Tables VII and VIII. We see that the results are consistent with
the analysis in Section V-A: the untargeted attacks nearly have
no impact on the accuracy of the final model (only slightly
decreasing the speed of convergence). Since GA may directly
upload noise, it can be easily detected from the beginning of
the training to the end, resulting in the same convergence
as the baseline. For LFA, Krum, Trim, and AA Attacks,
MUDGUARD is also difficult to distinguish between semi-honest
and malicious clients at the beginning. Thus, the speed of
convergence is slightly decreased. The main difference is that:
LeNet achieves around 78% in FMNIST, while ResNet-18
provides approx. 56% accuracy in CIFAR-10.

(a) Gaussian Attack

(b) Label Flipping Attack

(c) Krum Attack

(d) Trim Attack

(e) Adaptive Attack

(f) Backdoor Attack

Fig. 4: Comparison of testing accuracy among baseline, semihonest, and malicious groups under targeted attacks (a-e) and
ASR between the groups under untargeted attack (f), where
we use LeNet to train FMNIST by default settings in Table II.

loss of the effectiveness of Byzantine-robustness. A similar
situation can be found when α is set as too small (in this case,
all clients will be identified as noise.). From the experiment,
we found 1 is a best practice for α, so we set it as the default
parameter. Nevertheless, MUDGUARD cannot 100% guarantee
to exclude EA because EA has a strong stealthiness. We will
leave this as future work.

We also provide comparisons with the state-of-the-art
Byzantine-robust methods in Figure 6 and 7 on FMNIST
and CIFAR-10 respectively. Similar to Figure 3, under the
malicious majority of untargeted attacks, the testing accuracies
of FLTrust, MUDGUARD, and weights-MUDGUARD are
maintained at the same level of the baseline. Under the targeted
attacks, FLTrust, MUDGUARD, and weights-MUDGUARD
can restrain ASR to about 0%-10%. For more detailed explanations, please refer to Section V-A.

Impact of λ on Adaptive Attack. Figure 9 shows how the
ASR varies in semi-honest and malicious groups when we
adapt BA to MUDGUARD, where (F)MNIST, CIFAR-10 and
default settings in Table II are used. In MNIST (Figure 9a), the
ASR of the semi-honest group remains at a low level (nearly
0%) while that of the malicious group raises from 0.23 to 1 as
λ grows from 0.1 to 0.3. This is so because when the value of
λ is low, the malicious clients using AA more focus on evading
filtering (i.e., inducing a drop in clustering accuracy). Even if
malicious clients are grouped with semi-honest clients, they
cannot produce practical attack effectiveness. When the value
of λ gradually increases, the malicious clients will focus more
on attack performance. In this way, MUDGUARD will easily
distinguish the malicious from the semi-honest. It thus can

Impact of α on robustness of MUDGUARD Turning back
to Section IV-B and Theorem 1, the Byzantine-robustness
of MUDGUARD relies on whether we can choose a desirable
density α. From the experimental results in Section V-A, we
know that EA has a stronger stealthiness than other attacks.
Therefore, we use EA as an example in this section to analyze
the influence of α on MUDGUARD. Figure 8 shows how the
ASR and clustering accuracy varies in semi-honest and malicious groups under EA when we√change α. Consistent with
Theorem 1, once α is great than 2, the malicious and semihonest clients will cluster together, resulting in MUDGUARD
20

Attacks

Baseline

GA

LFA

Krum

Trim

AA

BA

ξ

0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

0.811
0.783
0.769
0.754
0.755

0.803
0.772
0.767
0.752
0.737

0.772
0.77
0.747
0.731
0.73

0.751
0.761
0.723
0.743
0.718

0.763
0.757
0.726
0.754
0.724

0.793 / 0
0.784 / 0.002
0.776 / 0.003
0.771 / 0.001
0.753 / 0.002

0.797 / 0
0.801 / 0
0.777 / 0.005
0.758 / 0.001
0.731 / 0.008

n

10
50
100
200
500

0.846
0.834
0.783
0.774
0.61

0.844
0.829
0.772
0.77
0.601

0.824
0.829
0.77
0.763
0.61

0.829
0.829
0.761
0.771
0.599

0.831
0.827
0.757
0.766
0.602

0.836 / 0
0.827 / 0
0.784 / 0.002
0.747 / 0.002
0.615 / 0.015

0.845 / 0
0.836 / 0
0.801 / 0
0.771 / 0.002
0.602 / 0.003

q

0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9

0.787
0.788
0.783
0.65
0.566

0.787
0.777
0.772
0.637
0.542

0.772
0.765
0.77
0.657
0.545

0.789
0.773
0.761
0.639
0.542

0.786
0.784
0.757
0.65
0.548

0.783 / 0
0.783 / 0
0.784 / 0.002
0.642 / 0.008
0.546 / 0.001

0.787 / 0.004
0.782 / 0.002
0.801 / 0
0.649 / 0.006
0.55 / 0.007

TABLE VII: Comparison of accuracy with baseline and ASR by an increasing proportion of malicious clients (ξ ≥ 0.5), #clients
n and non-iid degree q, where FMNIST is used. The results under targeted attacks are in the form of “testing accuracy / ASR".
Attacks

Baseline

GA

LFA

Krum

Trim

AA

BA

EA

ξ

0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

0.573
0.562
0.54
0.519
0.489

0.57
0.559
0.52
0.508
0.492

0.574
0.559
0.506
0.489
0.474

0.557
0.547
0.513
0.494
0.45

0.562
0.534
0.515
0.488
0.483

0.568 / 0.006
0.521 / 0.011
0.531 / 0.011
0.482 / 0.003
0.475 / 0.006

0.572 / 0.007
0.567 / 0
0.524 / 0
0.52 / 0.004
0.484 / 0.008

0.571 / 0.019
0.568 / 0.03
0.531 / 0.031
0.501 / 0.05
0.478 / 0.059

n

10
50
100
200
500

0.677
0.641
0.562
0.46
0.27

0.672
0.637
0.559
0.453
0.26

0.668
0.635
0.559
0.474
0.254

0.665
0.653
0.547
0.457
0.274

0.668
0.634
0.534
0.45
0.252

0.658 / 0
0.639 / 0
0.521 / 0.011
0.468 / 0.003
0.276 / 0.004

0.659 / 0.001
0.647 / 0.001
0.567 / 0
0.446 / 0
0.262 / 0

0.66 / 0.037
0.641 / 0.068
0.568 / 0.03
0.458 / 0.028
0.242 / 0

q

0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9

0.573
0.567
0.562
0.426
0.229

0.574
0.567
0.559
0.417
0.227

0.566
0.556
0.559
0.394
0.216

0.562
0.535
0.547
0.435
0.224

0.554
0.553
0.534
0.424
0.229

0.555 / 0
0.561 / 0
0.521 / 0.011
0.44 / 0.013
0.219 / 0.024

0.572 / 0.001
0.569 / 0
0.567 / 0
0.41 / 0.004
0.217 / 0.013

0.558 / 0.058
0.543 / 0.064
0.568 / 0.03
0.429 / 0.015
0.214 / 0.018

TABLE VIII: Comparison of accuracy with baseline and ASR by an increasing proportion of malicious clients (ξ ≥ 0.5), #clients
n and non-iid degree q, where CIFAR-10 is used. The results under targeted attacks are in the form of “testing accuracy / ASR".

resist AA. Note the experimental results with FMNIST and
CIFAR-10 (Figure 9b and c) share the same trend with MNIST
(Figure 9a).

stage is the most computationally expensive. We, therefore,
focus on its optimization. After the optimization, the servers
avoid using “heavy" tools, like HE and Beaver’s multiplication,
to calculate cosine so that communication and computational
overheads are naturally reduced. Therefore, MUDGUARD has
much lighter complexity than FLAME.

I. Discussions
1) Boosting Accuracy: Intuitively, CIFAR-10 is more difficult to train than (F)MNIST. SignSGD [6] achieves 90% accuracy with centralized learning. The reasons for the accuracy
drop in FL are (1) the number of clients: when the number
increases, the amount of data allocated to a client becomes
smaller, and the local model is more prone to overfitting; (2)
Data heterogeneity: a larger degree of non-iid leads to less
information being available for the local model to learn, which
harms accuracy; (3) Malicious clients: malicious clients taking
a part of the training data can be filtered out by MUDGUARD.
This is equivalent to discarding that part of the training
data. Additional improvements in accuracy could be obtained
by using different models, e.g., ViT [21], or by performing
hyperparameters grid search for FL, etc.

Note that FLAME uses a 2-party semi-honest MPC scheme
which is very similar to the semi-honest situation in our
design (Table V). Our optimized version of MUDGUARD is less
computationally and communicationally complex than FLAME.
In MUDGUARD, CosM is calculated by doing XOR locally
on servers, and the matrix size reduces from the number of
clients × the number of model updates (n × d) to n × n after
calculation. Then this n × n matrix is used to calculate the
pairwise-L2 distance (where only multiplication is involved).
In FLAME, directly calculating cosine similarity requires multiplication, division, and the square root of the n × d matrix,
which are relatively intensive, expensive operations in MPC.
The fact that FLAME’s code is not publicly available prevents
a code/implementation-based comparison.

2) Comparison of Overheads with FLAME: Intuitively,
systems that use clustering, like FLAME [49], could experience
efficiency problem if left without proper optimization. In
our design, MPC impacts three main phases: computation of
CosM, L2 distance, and element-wise comparison. The 1st

We followed state-of-the-art Byzantine-robust FL [15]’s
default setting on the client number (number = 100). Table V
shows overheads (the runtime and communication costs) on
the server side are acceptable; in particular, only 0.4s and 16
21

(a) Gaussian Attack

(b) Label Flipping Attack

(a) Gaussian Attack

(b) Label Flipping Attack

(c) Krum Attack

(d) Trim Attack

(c) Krum Attack

(d) Trim Attack

(e) Adaptive Attack

(f) Backdoor Attack

(e) Adaptive Attack

(f) Backdoor Attack

Fig. 6: Comparison with Byzantine-robust methods in FMNIST by ξ = 0.1 − 0.9.

of the backdoor task. Since the cosine distance between
malicious and benign updates are distinguishable, MUDGUARD
can still work well under DBA. Note another attack, Little Is
Enough [4], have not been considered in this work because it
requires attackers to have knowledge of the gradients of semihonest clients, which violates privacy preservation.

(g) Edge-case Attack

Fig. 5: Comparison of testing accuracy among baseline, semihonest, and malicious groups under targeted attacks (a-e) and
ASR between the groups under untargeted attacks (f-g), where
we use ResNet-18 to train CIFAR-10 by the default settings
in Table II.

4) Advantages of Adjusted Cosine Similarity: As shown
in Figure 10, we present an example of the calculation of
adjusted cosine similarity. It is clear to see that adjusted cosine
similarity is able to capture the magnitudes and directions of
updates by transferring updates to adjusted updates. Although
m1 does not have too many differences in directions (i.e.,
m1 will be clustered with h1 and h2 ), its differences with
h1 and h2 in magnitudes can be easily captured by CosM.
Furthermore, due to non-iid, the (h1 , h2 ) and (h3 , h4 ) will
be clustered into two groups if cosine distance is applied.
However, by subtracting mean updates, this influence can be
reduced.

MB are required with LeNet in the semi-honest case.
3) Defending Against Other Attacks: In the experiments,
we consider SOTA (un)targeted attacks. We say that interested readers may use other attacks to test MUDGUARD, in
which Byzantine-robustness could not be seriously affected.
We take the Distributed Backdoor Attack (DBA) [62] as
an example. DBA decomposes a global trigger into several
pieces distributed to local clients. It, however, yields significant
changes to some dimensions of updates to maintain the ASR

We also show the experimental results in Figure 11, where
FMNIST is used under BA and the number of clients is set
to 10 (the first six are benign clients, the rest are malicious
clients). The rest of the default settings follow Table II. From
Figure 10, we can see that if only cosine distance is calculated,
22

(a) Gaussian Attack

(b) Label Flipping Attack

(a) MNIST

(b) CIFAR-10

Fig. 8: Impact of α on the robustness of MUDGUARD, where
EA and default settings are used.

(c) Krum Attack

(d) Trim Attack

(a) MNIST

(e) Adaptive Attack

(b) FMNIST

(f) Backdoor Attack

(c) CIFAR-10

Fig. 9: Impact of λ on Adaptive Attack, where backdoor attack
and default settings are used.

(g) Edge-case Attack

Fig. 7: Comparison with Byzantine-robust methods in CIFAR10 by ξ = 0.1 − 0.9.

honest updates will be classified as noise due to the influence
of non-iid. The adjusted cosine similarity weakens this effect
(Figure 10b). Calculating the L2 distance again will make the
distinction between the two groups more obvious (Figure 10c).
Furthermore, we provide a comparison when MUDGUARD
uses cosine similarity and adjusted cosine similarity for clustering in Figure 12. It is clear to see that the testing accuracy of
MUDGUARD with cosine similarity abruptly goes down when
the model approaches convergence. On the contrary, this does
not happen in MUDGUARD with adjusted cosine similarity. The
detailed explanation is given in Section IV-B.

Fig. 10: An example of calculation of adjusted cosine similarity

5) Dynamic Attacks: Recall that MUDGUARD can perform
well in terms of testing accuracy under the assumption that
23

group those attacks together friendly and meanwhile maximize
their attack effects. In practice, the attacks may deliver an
update in different directions, and further, they may even yield
influence on each other. For example, GA could easily destroy
the convergence of BA. We say that it is an interesting open
problem to consider launching GA, LFA, Krum, Trim, and AA
attacks together in an epoch to evaluate the accuracy and ARS.

(a) Pairwise cosine distance

6) Varying Clients Subsampling Rate: We assert that
MUDGUARD can perform well under different clients’ subsampling rates. This benefits from the proposed Model Segmentation that can resist malicious-majority clients. Imagine
that in the context of an honest majority (e.g., 40 out of 100
are malicious), if the subsampling rate is set relatively low
(e.g., 10%), we eventually have a malicious majority case in
one training epoch with a high probability. Our experimental
results have demonstrated that MUDGUARD can still achieve
Byzantine-robustness under a low subsampling rate.

(b) Pairwise adjusted cosine distance (CosM)

7) Learning Rate and Local Epoch: They are subtle parameters that decide the performance of FL training. A low
learning rate can slow down the speed of convergence, and on
the other hand, a high rate hinders the model’s convergence,
harming accuracy. As for the local epoch, in the case of iid,
if carefully increasing the number of epochs, we can make
the model converge fast. But under a large degree of non-iid
(e.g., q=0.5), the increase of epoch leads to updates in different
directions, making the FedAvg algorithm invalid [43]. In
this work, we set these two parameters according to the
recommendations given in [43], [6]. Exploring their impacts
on training is orthogonal to the main focus of this work.

(c) Pairwise L2 distance for CosM

Fig. 11: Calculation results of pairwise distance.

8) Privacy-preserving DBSCAN: This is one of the core
parts we used to build MUDGUARD. It can apply to other realworld domains, e.g., anomaly detection and encrypted traffic
analytics, where data should be clustered securely. But we note
that the current MUDGUARD with optimization may not scale
well in these applications. We did the optimization for the
sake of efficiency by using SignSGD and binary secret sharing,
which cannot support precise floating-point arithmetic.
9) Test Datasets: We notice that the EA is not applicable
for FMINST since the research work [58] did not provide a
backdoor dataset. We leave this as an open problem. Based on
the performance of MUDGUARD on MNIST and CIFAR-10, we
claim that even in FMNIST, the ASR of EA stays low, which
is consistent with our main conclusion.

Fig. 12: Comparison of MUDGUARD with cosine similarity
and adjusted cosine similarity under GA.

malicious clients consistently perform one type of attack (e.g.,
GA) throughout the whole training period. It can also perform
well if we allow malicious clients to perform different attacks
on the epochs, e.g., GA to the first 10 epochs and then Krum
attacks to the remaining epochs. We notice that all the attacks
(we consider in this work) except GA may require several
epochs of training (as a buffer) to produce attack effects.
But these buffer epochs can boost MUDGUARD’s clustering
performance. This is so because the clustering ability is
enhanced with the increase of training rounds. On the other
hand, the TNR and TPR (of the clustering) could be relatively
low in these epochs. Some malicious clients can be clustered
into a semi-honest group, but this will not seriously affect the
accuracy performance of the model.

In the experiments, we conduct three image datasets
(MNIST, FMNIST, and CIFAR-10). We claim that MUDGUARD
can be further used to capture the Byzantine-robust and
privacy-preserving features of the models trained on text and
speech datasets, where the text dataset for the next-word prediction task can require Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs).
To train these datasets, we can also use weights or gradients
to update the models (in the context of FL). If the models or
datasets are poisoned (by malicious clients), malicious updates
have differences in updates directions from benign ones. Then
we can use MUDGUARD to protect benign clients. We could
use other types of datasets during training, but this will not
affect our conclusions on Byzantine robustness and privacy
preservation.

One may think malicious clients are allowed to perform all
the attacks in a single epoch. But so far, it is unknown how to

10)Limitations: Using weights as updates. To provide costeffective secure computations, the proposed MUDGUARD only
24

implements the update method by SignSGD. If we use weights
as updates, the secret shares sent to the servers will be in
floating-point format. In this case, we will have to downgrade
the design to the unoptimized MUDGUARD in Table V, which
could cause a considerable amount of both communication
costs and runtime. An interesting future work could be to
propose a more lightweight (than the current design) and
secure MPC framework for MUDGUARD.
Performance under EA. Although MUDGUARD does achieve
good performance in terms of accuracy and (to some extent)
efficiency, under the EA, MUDGUARD’s ASR cannot be eventually reduced to nearly 0%. In future work, we will improve the
TNR and TPR of the clustering algorithm so as to recognize
subtle differences between malicious and semi-honest clients.

25

