arXiv:2306.12608v4 [cs.CR] 14 Dec 2024

DP-BREM: Differentially-Private and Byzantine-Robust Federated Learning
with Client Momentum
Xiaolan Gu
University of Arizona
xiaolang@arizona.edu

Ming Li
University of Arizona
lim@arizona.edu

Abstract

This offers a promising solution to mitigate the potential
privacy leakage of sensitive information about individuals
(since the data stays local with each client), such as typing
history, shopping transactions, geographical locations, and
medical records. However, recent works have demonstrated
that FL may not always provide sufficient privacy and robustness guarantees. In terms of privacy leakage, exchanging
the model updates throughout the training process can still
reveal sensitive information [4, 32] and cause deep leakage
such as pixel-wise accurate image recovery [49, 52], either to
a third-party (including other participating clients) or the central server. In terms of robustness, the decentralization design
of FL systems opens up the training process to be manipulated
by malicious clients, aiming to either prevent the convergence
of the global model (a.k.a. Byzantine attacks) [3, 16, 46], or
implant a backdoor trigger into the global model to cause
targeted misclassification (a.k.a. backdoor attacks) [2, 45].
To mitigate the privacy leakage in FL, Differential Privacy
(DP) [13, 14] has been adopted as a rigorous privacy notion.
Existing frameworks [19, 27, 31] applied DP in FL to provide
client-level privacy under the assumption of a trusted server:
whether a client has participated in the training process cannot
be inferred by a third party from the released global model.
Other works in FL [27, 42, 47, 50] focused on record-level
privacy: whether a data record at a client has participated
during training cannot be inferred by the server or other adversaries that have access to the model updates or the global
model. Record-level privacy is more relevant in cross-silo (as
versus cross-device) FL scenarios, such as multiple hospitals
collaboratively learn a prediction model for COVID-19, in
which case what needs to be protected is the privacy of each
patient (corresponding to each record in a hospital’s dataset).
In this paper, we focus on cross-silo FL with record-level DP,
where each client possesses a set of raw records, and each
record corresponds to an individual’s private data.
To defend against Byzantine attacks, robust FL protocols
are proposed to ensure that the training procedure is robust
to a fraction of potentially malicious clients. This problem
has received significant attention from the community. Most

Federated Learning (FL) allows multiple participating clients
to train machine learning models collaboratively while keeping their datasets local and only exchanging the gradient or
model updates with a coordinating server. Existing FL protocols are vulnerable to attacks that aim to compromise data
privacy and/or model robustness. Recently proposed defenses
focused on ensuring either privacy or robustness, but not both.
In this paper, we focus on simultaneously achieving differential privacy (DP) and Byzantine robustness for cross-silo
FL, based on the idea of learning from history. The robustness is achieved via client momentum, which averages the
updates of each client over time, thus reducing the variance
of the honest clients and exposing the small malicious perturbations of Byzantine clients that are undetectable in a single
round but accumulate over time. In our initial solution DPBREM, DP is achieved by adding noise to the aggregated
momentum, and we account for the privacy cost from the momentum, which is different from the conventional DP-SGD
that accounts for the privacy cost from the gradient. Since
DP-BREM assumes a trusted server (who can obtain clients’
local models or updates), we further develop the final solution called DP-BREM+ , which achieves the same DP and
robustness properties as DP-BREM without a trusted server
by utilizing secure aggregation techniques, where DP noise
is securely and jointly generated by the clients. Both theoretical analysis and experimental results demonstrate that our
proposed protocols achieve better privacy-utility tradeoff and
stronger Byzantine robustness than several baseline methods,
under different DP budgets and attack settings.

1

Li Xiong
Emory University
lxiong@emory.edu

Introduction

Federated learning (FL) [30] is an emerging paradigm that
enables multiple clients to collaboratively learn models without explicitly sharing their data. The clients upload their local
model updates to a coordinating server, which then shares
the global average with the clients in an iterative process.
1

existing approaches replace the averaging step at the server
with a robust aggregation rule, such as the median [5,9,33,48].
However, recent state-of-the-art attacks [3,39,46] have demonstrated the failure of the above robust aggregators. Furthermore, a recent work [23] shows that there exist realistic scenarios where these robust aggregators fail to converge, even
if there are no Byzantine attackers and the data distribution
is identical (i.i.d.) across the clients, and proposed a new solution called Learning From History (LFH) to address this
issue. LFH achieves robustness via client momentum with the
motivation of averaging the updates of each client over time,
thus reducing the variance of the honest clients and exposing
the small malicious perturbations of Byzantine clients that
are undetectable in a single round but accumulate over time.
In this paper, we focus on achieving record-level DP and
Byzantine robustness simultaneously in cross-silo FL. Existing FL protocols with DP-SGD [1] do not achieve the
robustness property intrinsically. Directly implementing an
existing robust aggregator over the privatized client gradients
will lead to poor utility because these aggregators (such as
median [5, 33, 48]) usually have large sensitivity and require
large DP noise, leading to poor utility. It is desirable to achieve
DP guarantees based on average-based aggregators. Although
LFH [23] is an average-based Byzantine-robust FL protocol,
it aggregates client momentum instead of gradient, thus it
is non-trivial to achieve DP on top of LFH. We show that
a direct combination of LFH with DP-SGD momentum has
several limitations, leading to both poor utility and robustness.
Therefore, we aim to address these limitations in our solution.
To achieve an enhanced privacy-utility tradeoff, we start
our problem from an assumption that the server is trusted
and developed a Differentially-Private and Byzantine-Robust
fEderated learning algorithm with client Momentum (DPBREM), which essentially is a DP version of the Byzantinerobust method LFH [23]. Instead of adding DP noise to the
gradient and then aggregating momentum as post-processing,
we add DP noise to the aggregated momentum with carefully
computed sensitivity to account for the privacy cost. Since
the noise is added to the final aggregate (instead of intermediate local gradient), our basic solution DP-BREM maintains
the non-private LFH’s robustness as much as possible, which
we show both theoretically (via convergence analysis) and
empirically (via experimental results). Then, we relax our
trust assumption to a malicious server (for privacy only) and
develop our final solution DP-BREM+ . It utilizes secure multiparty computation (MPC) techniques, including secure aggregation and secure noise generation, to achieve the same
DP and robustness guarantees as in DP-BREM. In Table 1,
we compare DP-BREM and DP-BREM+ with existing approaches (or the variants) that achieve both DP and Byzantine
robustness (DDP-RP [44] and DP-RSA [51] are described in
Sec. 7). These approaches will be evaluated and compared in
experiments. Our main contributions are:
1) We propose DP-BREM, a novel differentially private

and Byzantine-robust FL protocol that adds DP noise to aggregated client momentum with computed sensitivity. Our
privacy analysis (Theorem 1) accounts for momentum, differing from conventional DP-SGD which accounts for gradient.
Our convergence analysis (Theorem 3) shows minimal convergence rate sacrifice for DP compared to the baseline.
2) Considering that DP-BREM is developed under the assumption of a trusted server, we propose the final solution
called DP-BREM+ (Section 5), which achieves the same privacy and robustness properties as DP-BREM, even under
a malicious server (for privacy only), using secure multiparty computation techniques. DP-BREM+ is built based on
the framework of secure aggregation with verifiable inputs
(SAVI) [36], but extends it to guarantee the integrity of DP
noise via a novel secure distributed noise generation protocol.
Our extended SAVI protocol is general enough to be applied
to other DP and robust FL protocols that are average-based.
3) We demonstrate our protocols’ effectiveness through
extensive experiments on MNIST, CIFAR-10, and FEMNIST
datasets (Section 6), showing improved utility with the same
record-level DP guarantees and strong robustness against
Byzantine clients under state-of-the-art attacks, compared
to baseline methods.

2
2.1

Preliminaries
Differential Privacy (DP)

Differential Privacy (DP) is a rigorous mathematical framework for the release of information derived from private data.
Applied to machine learning, a differentially private training
mechanism allows the public release of model parameters
with a strong privacy guarantee: adversaries are limited in
what they can learn about the original training data based
on analyzing the parameters, even when they have access to
arbitrary side information. The formal definition is as follows:
Definition 1 ((ε, δ)-DP [13,14]). For ε ∈ [0, ∞) and δ ∈ [0, 1),
a randomized mechanism M : D → R with a domain D (e.g.,
possible training datasets) and range R (e.g., all possible
trained models) satisfies (ε, δ)-Differential Privacy (DP) if
for any two neighboring datasets D, D′ ∈ D that differ in only
one record and for any subset of outputs S ⊆ R , it holds that
P[M (D) ∈ S] ⩽ eε · P[M (D′ ) ∈ S] + δ
where ε and δ are privacy parameters (or privacy budget),
and a smaller ε and δ indicate a more private mechanism.
Gaussian Mechanism. A common paradigm for approximating a deterministic real-valued function f : D → R with
a differentially-private mechanism is via additive noise calibrated to f ’s sensitivity s f , which is defined as the maximum
of the absolute distance | f (D) − f (D′ )|. The Gaussian Mechanism is defined by M (D) = f (D) + N (0, s2f · σ2 ), where
2

N (0, s2f · σ2 ) is noise drawn from a Gaussian distribution. It
2
was shown that M satisfies (ε, δ)-DP if δ ⩾ 54 e−(σε) /2 and

LFH: Non-private Byzantine-Robust Defense. Recently,
Karimireddy et al. [23] showed that most state-of-the-art robust aggregators require strong assumptions and may not
converge even in the complete absence of Byzantine attackers.
Then, they proposed a new Byzantine-robust scheme called
"learning from history" (LFH) that essentially utilizes two
simple strategies: client momentum (during local update) and
centered clipping (during server aggregation). In each iteration t, client Ci receives the global model parameter θt−1
from the server, and computes the local gradient of the random
dataset batch Di,t ⊆ Di by

ε < 1 [14]. Note that we use an advanced privacy analysis
tool proposed in [12], which works for all ε > 0.
DP-SGD Algorithm. The most well-known differentiallyprivate algorithm in machine learning is DP-SGD [1], which
introduces two modifications to the vanilla stochastic gradient
descent (SGD). First, a clipping step is applied to the gradient
so that the gradient is in effect bounded for a finite sensitivity.
The second modification is Gaussian noise augmentation on
the summation of clipped gradients, which is equivalent to
applying the Gaussian mechanism to the updated iterates. The
privacy accountant of DP-SGD is shown in Appendix I.

2.2

gt,i =

(1)

where ∇θ ℓ(x , θt−1 ) is the per-record gradient w.r.t. the loss
function ℓ(·). The client momentum can be computed via

Federated Learning (FL) with DP

Federated Learning (FL) [22, 30] is a collaborative learning
setting to train machine learning models. We consider the horizontal cross-silo FL setting, which involves multiple clients,
each holding their own private dataset of the same set of features, and a central server that implements the aggregation.
Unlike the traditional centralized approach, data is not stored
at a central server; instead, clients train models locally and
exchange updated parameters with the server, which aggregates the received local model parameters and sends them to
the clients. Based on the participating clients and scale, federated learning can be classified into two types: cross-device
FL where clients are typically mobile devices and the client
number can reach up to a scale of millions; cross-silo FL (our
focus) where clients are organizations or companies and the
client number is relatively small (e.g., within hundreds).
FL with DP. In FL, the neighboring datasets D and D′ in
Definition 1 can be defined at two distinct levels: record-level
and client-level. In cross-device FL, each device usually stores
one individual’s data, and then the whole device’s data should
be protected. It corresponds to client-level DP, where D′ is
obtained by adding or removing one client/device’s whole
training dataset from D. In cross-silo FL, each record corresponds to one individual’s data, then record-level DP should
be provided, where D′ is obtained by adding or removing a
single training record/example from D. Since we consider
cross-silo FL, achieving record-level DP is our privacy goal.

2.3

1
∇θ ℓ(x , θt−1 )
|Di,t | ∑x ∈Di,t

mt,i = (1 − β)gt,i + βmt−1,i

(2)

where β ∈ [0, 1). After receiving mt,i from all clients, the
server implements aggregation with centered clipping via
mt = mt−1 +

1 n
mt,i − mt−1 )
ClipC (m
n ∑i=1

(3)

where ClipC (·) with scalar C > 0 is the clipping function:
ClipC (x ) := x · min{1, C/∥x ∥}

(4)

and ∥x ∥ is the L2-norm of any vector x . The clipping operation ClipC (mt,i − mt−1 ) essentially bounds the distance
between client’s local momentum mt,i and the previous aggregated momentum mt−1 , thus restricts the impact from Byzantine clients. Then, the global model θt can be updated by
θt = θt−1 − ηt mt with learning rate ηt . The convergence rate
under Byzantine attacks is shown by the following lemma.
Lemma 1 (Convergence Rate of LFH [23]). With some parameter tuning, the convergence rate of the Byzantine-robust
algorithm LFH is asymptotically (ignoring constants and
higher order terms) of the order
r
1 T
ρ2 1 + |B |
2
θ
E∥∇ℓ(θ
)∥
≲
(5)
t−1
∑
T t=1
T
n
where ℓ(·) is the loss function, T is the total number of training
iterations, |B | is the number of Byzantine clients, n is the
number of all clients, and ρ is a parameter that quantifies the
variance of honest clients’ stochastic gradients:

Byzantine Attacks and Defenses

In a Byzantine attack, the adversary aims to destroy the convergence of the model. Due to the decentralization design, FL
systems are vulnerable to Byzantine clients, who may not follow the protocol and can send arbitrary updates to the server.
Also, they may have complete knowledge of the system and
can collude with each other. Most state-of-the-art defense
mechanisms [5, 9, 33, 48] play with median statistics of client
gradients. However, recent attacks [3, 46] have empirically
demonstrated the failure of the above robust aggregations.

E∥gt,i − E[gt,i ]∥2 ⩽ ρ2

(6)

Interpretation of Lemma 1. When there are no Byzantine
clients, LFH recovers the optimal rate of √ρnT . In the presence
of a |B |/n fraction
q of Byzantine clients, the rate has an additional term ρ |BT|/n , which depends on the fraction |B |/n
but does not improve with increasing clients.
3

3
3.1

Problem Statement and Motivation

3.2

Challenges and Baseline

Challenges. Replacing the average-based aggregator with
median-based or complex robust aggregators increases DP
sensitivity. Achieving both DP and Byzantine robustness with
high utility is challenging because these methods result in significantly larger DP sensitivity than averaging, as illustrated
in Example 1.

Problem Statement

System Model. Our system model follows the general setting of Fed-SGD [30]. There are multiple parties in the FL
system: one aggregation server and n participating clients
{C1 , · · · , Cn }. The server holds a global model θt ∈ Rd and
each client Ci , i ∈ {1, · · · , n} possesses a private training
dataset Di . The server communicates with each client through
a secure (private and authenticated) channel. During the iterative training process, the server broadcasts the global model in
the current iteration to all clients and aggregates the received
gradient/momentum from all clients (or a subset of clients) to
update the global model until convergence. The final global
model is returned after the training process as the output.
Threat Model. The considered adversary aims to perform a
1) privacy attack and/or 2) Byzantine attack with the following
threat model, respectively.
1) Privacy Attack. Following the conventional FL setting,
we assume the server has no access to the client’s local training data, but may have an incentive to infer clients’ private
information. In our initial solution called DP-BREM, we
assume a trusted server that can obtain clients’ local models/updates. The adversary is a third party or the participating
clients (can be any set of clients) who have access to the intermediate and final global models and may use them to infer
the private data of an honest client Ci . Hence, the privacy goal
is to ensure the global model (and its update) satisfies DP.
In our final solution DP-BREM+ , in addition to third parties
and clients, the adversary also includes the server that tries
to infer additional information from the local updates (and
may deviate from the protocol for privacy inference). Such a
model is also adopted in previous work [36]. Following [36],
we assume a minority of malicious clients who can deviate
from the protocol arbitrarily.
2) Byzantine Attack. Recall that the goal of Byzantine
attacks is to destroy the convergence of the global model (discussed in Section 2.3). We only consider malicious clients
as the adversaries for Byzantine attacks because the server’s
primary goal is to train a robust model, thus no incentive to
implement Byzantine attacks. These malicious clients (assumed to be a minority of all participating clients) can deviate
from the protocol arbitrarily and have full control of both their
local training data and their submission to the servers, but do
not influence other honest clients.
Objectives. The goal of this paper is to achieve both recordlevel DP and Byzantine robustness at the same time. We
aim to provide high utility (i.e., high accuracy of the global
model) with the required DP guarantee under the existence
of Byzantine attacks from malicious clients. Our ultimate
privacy goal is to provide DP guarantees against an untrusted
server and other clients, but we start by assuming a trusted
server first in our initial solution.

Example 1 (Sensitivity Computation: Average vs. Median).
Consider a dataset with 5 samples: D = {1, 3, 5, 7, 9}, and
its neighboring dataset D ′ is obtained by changing one value
in D with at most 1, such as D ′ = {1, 3, 4 , 7, 9}. Then, the
sensitivity of average-query is max |avg(D ) − avg(D ′ )| =
D ,D ′

1/5 = 0.2. However, the sensitivity of median-query is
max |median(D ) − median(D ′ )| = 1. Moreover, when inD ,D ′

creasing the size of the dataset, the sensitivity of the average
query will be reduced (and then less noise to be added), while
the sensitivity of the median query is the same.
DP-LFH: baseline via direct combination of LFH and
DP-SGD. As shown in Section 2.3, the Byzantine-robust
scheme LFH [23] utilizes an average-based aggregator, which
can be regarded as a non-private robust solution to address
the disadvantage of the median-based aggregator. A straightforward method to add DP protection on top of LFH is to
combine it with the DP-SGD algorithm. However, LFH requires each client to compute the local momentum mt,i for
server aggregation, while DP-SGD aggregates gradients and
accounts for the privacy cost via the composition of iterative gradient update. In LFH, since the gradient is computed
only on the client-side, a straightforward solution to integrate
DP is to use DP-SGD at each client to privatize the local
gradient, and then compute the momentum from the privatized gradient (thus there is no additional privacy cost due to
post-processing). Formally, client Ci computes

gt,i =

1

|Di,t | x ∈∑
D

ClipR (∇θ ℓ(x , θt−1 )) + N (0, R2 σ2 Id ), (7)

i,t

where Id is an identity matrix with size d × d (d is the model
size, i.e., θt ∈ Rd ), the record-level clipping ClipR (·) restricts
the sensitivity when adding/removing one record from the
local dataset, and Gaussian noise N (0, R2 σ2 Id ) introduces
DP property on gt,i . Since DP is immune to post-processing,
the remaining steps can follow the original LFH without additional privacy costs. This baseline solution DP-LFH achieves
record-level DP against an untrusted server but has limitations,
leading to poor privacy-utility tradeoff and robustness.
Limitation 1: large aggregated noise. Since each client
locally adds DP noise, the overall noise after aggregation
is larger than the case of the central setting under the same
privacy budget ε since only the server adds noise in the central
setting. Therefore, DP-LFH has a poor privacy-utility tradeoff.
4

Table 1: Comparison of FL approaches with DP and Byzantine-robustness
Approaches

Differential Privacy (DP) §

Byzantine Robustness

Trust Assumption
of Server

Noise
Generator

Perturbation
Mechanism

Standard Deviation
of Noise in Aggregate

Mechanism

trusted

server

∑i gi + N (0, σ2 )

σ

client norm clipping

trusted

server

median({gi }ni=1 ) + N (0, σ2 )

σ

coordinate-wise median (CM)

DDP-RP [44] ⋄

honest-but-curious

clients
(distributively)

∑i [gi + N (0, στ )]

pn

element-wise range proof

DP-RSA [51]

untrusted

client

∑i [sign(gi ) + N (0, σ2 )]

untrusted

client

∑i [mi + N (0, σ2 )]

trusted

server

untrusted

clients
(jointly)

DP-FedSGD [31]
with both record and
client norm clippings
CM [48] with
DP noise

DP-LFH
(baseline in Sec. 3.2)
DP-BREM
(our initial solution)
DP-BREM+
(our final solution) †

2

τ ·σ

√
n·σ
√
n·σ

aggregation of sign-SGD

LFH [23]: client momentum
and centered clipping

∑i mi + N (0, σ2 )

σ

§ We demonstrate the privacy-utility tradeoff by comparing the standard deviation of DP noise on the aggregation, with smaller values indicating less negative

impact on utility. Note that different approaches use different aggregation strategies, where gi is the local gradient and mi is the local momentum.
⋄ DDP-RP assumes an honest-but-curious server and ensures distributed DP (DDP) with secure aggregation. Clients add partial noise with a smaller standard
deviation based on the number of honest clients, τ, resulting in a better privacy-utility tradeoff than local DP (LDP).
† DP-BREM+ matches DP-BREM’s DP and robustness guarantees with a different server trust assumption. It achieves central DP without a trusted server, as

clients securely generate and add noise using the proposed noise generation and secure aggregation protocols.

where g 1,i , g 2,i , · · · , gt,i are already privatized via local noise.
Assume the server samples a subset of clients for aggregation
in each iteration. If client Ci ’s momentum mt,i is not selected
in the t-th iteration, the aggregate is independent of gt,i . However, in a later iteration (i.e., τ > t), if client Ci ’s momentum
m τ,i is included, it depends on gt,i according to (9). Thus,
we must account for the privacy cost of gt,i in all iterations.
Sampling clients offers no privacy amplification, resulting in
high privacy costs or low utility.

Limitation 2: large impact on Byzantine robustness.
Since the DP noise is added locally to each client’s gradient before momentum-based clipping, it leads to a negative impact
on Byzantine robustness: the noisy client momentum mt,i has
larger variance than the noise-free one, which leads to larger
bias and variance on the clipping step ClipC (mt,i − mt−1 ). Furthermore, this impact will be enlarged when there are more
Byzantine clients, which is explained as follows. Since the
parameter ρ2 defined in (6) quantifies the variance of client’s
gradient, and the DP noise is added to the local gradient in
(7), the parameter
√ ρ of the convergence rate shown in (5) is
replaced by ρ + dσ (ignoring constants) for DP-LFH, i.e.,
the convergence rate of DP-LFH is asymptotic of the order
s
1 T
E∥∇ℓ(θt−1 )∥2 ≲
T ∑t=1

√
(ρ + dσ)2 1 + |B |
T
n

4

DP-BREM

To address DP-LFH’s limitations, we propose DP-BREM, a
differentially-private LFH variant assuming a trusted server
that generates DP noise. DP-BREM maintains robustness of
LFH and uses a different privacy accountant (Theorem 1) than
DP-SGD. We also provide convergence analysis (Theorem 3)
showing minimal deviation from LFH. We further relax the
server trust assumption in DP-BREM+ (Section 5) by using
secure multiparty computation for secure aggregation and
joint noise generation, achieving the same DP and robustness
guarantees without a trusted server.

(8)

Therefore, either a large d (i.e., large model) or a large σ (i.e.,
small privacy budget ε) will enlarge
the impact from Byzanp
tine clients due to the order O( dσ2 |B |) of convergence rate.
We note that Guerraoui et al.’s work [20] also shares a similar
insight: they show that DP with local noise and Byzantine
robustness are incompatible, especially when the dimension
of model parameters d is large.
Limitation 3: no privacy amplification from client-level
sampling due to momentum. According to the recursive repmt−1,i , client Ci ’s momentum
resentation mt,i = (1−β)ggt,i +βm
m
in t-th iteration t,i is essentially a weighted summation of
all previous privatized client gradients:

4.1

Algorithm Design

The illustration of our design is shown in Figure 1, and the
algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1, where all clients need
to implement local updates (in Line-3), but only a subset of
their momentum vectors are aggregated by the server (in Line4). The details of client updates and server aggregation are
described below.

mt,i = (1 − β)(ggt,i + βggt−1,i + · · · + βt−2 g2,i ) + βt−1 g1,i (9)
5

global model θt

④
+

①

Server

①

①

③

Client

②

① Server broadcasts model parameter θt
② Clients compute gradient and momentum
[DP design: record-level gradient clipping]
③ Selected clients send momentum to server
④ Server aggregates momentum to update model
[DP design: adding noise on the aggregate]

Algorithm 1 DP-BREM
Input: Initialization θ0 ∈ Rd , clipping bounds R and C, learning
rate ηt of the global model, total number of iterations T , clientlevel sampling rate q, record-level sampling rate pi .
1: for t = 1, · · · , T do
The server broadcasts the previous model θt−1 to all clients
2:
{Ci }ni=1 and selects a subset of client index It ⊆ {1, · · · , n},
where each client is selected with probability q.
3:
Each client Ci for i ∈ {1, · · · , n} implements the local updates
via (10) and (11), while only selected clients need to send the
local momentum mt,i (for i ∈ It ) to the server.
4:
The server aggregates received clients’ momentum (only for
i ∈ It ) with centered clipping and DP noise via (12), then
updates the global model θt via (13).
5: end for
Output: The final model parameter θ T .

Privacy analysis challenge: clipping on gradient
while adding noise on aggregated momentum

1 Client

②

(selected)

2

…
Client

②

n
(selected)

Clients might be malicious to
1) infer other’s private data
2) implement Byzantine attack

Figure 1: Illustration of our DP-BREM algorithm.
Client Updates. The client Ci first samples a random batch

Di,t from the local dataset Di with sampling rate pi , clips the
per-record gradient ∇θ ℓ(x , θt−1 ) by R and multiplies the sum
by a constant factor pi |1Di | to get the averaged gradient
ḡt,i =

1
ClipR (∇θ ℓ(xx, θt−1 ))
pi |Di | ∑x ∈Di,t

(10)
For clipping bounds, each client uses record-level bound R
to bound the per-record gradient in (10) for a finite sensitivity in record-level DP; while the server uses client-level
bound C to bound the difference between client momentum
m̄t,i and the previous noisy global momentum m̃t−1 in (12),
which achieves Byzantine robustness as in LFH. For sampling
rates, the client Ci samples a batch of records Di,t from the
local dataset Di with sampling rate pi , which provides privacy
amplification for DP from record-level sampling; while the
server samples a subset of clients with sampling rate q (where
the sampled clients set is denoted by It ), which provides privacy amplification for DP from client-level sampling.
Remark: comparison with non-private LFH. Comparing with the original non-private Byzantine-robust method
LFH [23] (see Section 2.3), our differentially-private version
has three differences. First, comparing with (1), the client gradient in (10) is computed by averaging the clipped per-record
gradient (with clipping bound R), which bounds the sensitivity of final aggregation when adding/removing one record
from the local dataset. Second, comparing with (3), the server
adds Gaussian noise when computing the aggregated global
momentum m̃t in (12) to guarantee DP. Third, instead of aggregating all clients’ momentum, our method also considers
aggregating a subset of them, reflected by the index set It in
(12). It provides additional privacy amplification from clientlevel sampling with sampling rate q. Note that the original
privacy amplification is provided by record-level sampling.

where ClipR (·) is the clipping function defined in (4), but is
used here to bound the sensitivity for DP (refer to DP-SGD
discussed in Section 2.1). Di,t represents a random subset
obtained via subsampling from client Ci ’s dataset. This subsampling is essential to apply privacy amplification, enabling
the privacy accountant to derive a tight privacy budget ε. Note
that the batch size |Di,t | is random and E[|Di,t |] = pi |Di |.
Then, the local momentum can be computed by
(
ḡt,i ,
if t = 1
m̄t,i =
(11)
(1 − β)ḡt,i + βm̄t−1,i , if t > 1
where β ∈ [0, 1) is the momentum parameter.
Server Aggregation. The server implements centered clipping with clipping parameter C > 0 to bound the difference
between client momentum m̄t,i and the previous noisy global
momentum m̃t−1 for robustness. Then, it adds Gaussian noise
with standard deviation Rσ (thus the variance is R2 σ2 ) to the
sum of clipped terms to get the noisy global momentum m̃t
i
1 h
m̃t = m̃t−1 +
ClipC (m̄t,i − m̃t−1 ) + N (0, R2 σ2 Id )
∑
i∈
I
t
|It |
(12)
where Id is an identity matrix with size d × d, and only the
sampled clients in It (which is obtained in Line-2 of Algorithm 1 with sampling rate q) are aggregated in t-th iteration. Note that adding noise N (0, R2 σ2 Id ) to the summation of clipped client momentum ∑i∈It ClipC (m̄t,i − m̃t−1 ) is
equivalent to adding noise |I1t | N (0, R2 σ2 Id ) to the average

4.2

Before presenting the final privacy analysis of DP-BREM, we
first show how we compute the sensitivity for the summation
of clipped client momentum in (12) for privacy analysis of
one iteration, shown in Lemma 2. We note that clients may
have different sizes of local datasets Di and can use different
record-level sampling rates pi , thus the record-level sensitivity
(denoted by Si ) for different clients can be different.

result |I1t | ∑i∈It ClipC (m̄t,i − m̃t−1 ). Then, the server updates
the global model θt with learning rate ηt
θt = θt−1 − ηt m̃t

Privacy Analysis

(13)

Remark: clipping bounds and sampling rates. In our algorithm, we use two clipping bounds and two sampling rates.
6

Lemma 2 (DP Sensitivity). We use ∥ · ∥ to denote L2norm ∥ · ∥2 . In the t-th round, denote the query function
Qt (D ) := ∑ j∈It ClipC (mt, j − m̃t−1 ), where m̃t−1 is public
and D = {D j } j∈It . Consider the neighboring dataset D ′ =
{D j } j̸=i, j∈It ∪ Di′ that differs in one record from client Ci ’s
local data (i ∈ It ), i.e., |Di − Di′ | = 1, then the sensitivity with
respect to client Ci is


R
Si := max ∥Qt (D ) − Qt (D ′ )∥ = min 2C,
(14)
pi |Di |
D ,D′

and δ satisfying




εi µi
εi µ i
δ=Φ − +
− eεi · Φ − −
,
µi 2
µi 2

(15)

where Φ(·) denotes the cumulative distribution function
(CDF) of standard normal distribution, and µi is defined by


q
R
2)
1/(2σ
i
µi = qpi T (e
− 1), with σi = σ · max
, pi |Di |
2C
(16)
Proof. This result is obtained by the composition of multiple
iterations and the privacy amplification from sampling. See
Appendix A for the detailed proof.

Proof. (Sketch) According to (10), the sensitivity of ḡt,i is
R
pi |Di | because each clipped term ClipR (·) has bounded L2norm, i.e., ∥ClipR (·)∥ ⩽ R. Then, due to the recursive representation of local momentum in (11), the sensitivity of mt,i
is pi |RDi | . Finally, the client-level clipping ClipC (·) introduces
another upper bound for the sensitivity. Refer to Appendix H
for the detailed proof.

4.3

Convergence Analysis

Before presenting the final convergence analysis of our solution, we first show the aggregation error for one iteration in
Theorem 2.

Remark: comparison with the privacy accountant of
DP-SGD momentum. As discussed in Section 3.2, the privacy accountant of DP-SGD with momentum (i.e., account for
privacy cost of gradient, then do post-processing for momentum) requires clients to add noise in the local gradients, which
leads to poor utility especially when Byzantine attacks exist.
In Lemma 2, we account for the privacy cost of aggregated
momentum, where the sensitivity is carefully computed from
the bounded record-level gradient. Therefore, our scheme
solves the three limitations shown in Section 3.2, which is
explained as follows. First, only the server adds noise (which
is the same as the central setting), thus the privacy-utility
tradeoff is not impacted. Second, the noise is added after the
centered clipping ClipC (m̄t,i − m̃t−1 ), thus it only introduces
unbiased error. We also show that (in Section 4.3) the impact from the added noise is separate from the impact from
Byzantine attacks, as versus the impact from the local noise
is enlarged with Byzantine attacks in DP-LFH (see Section
3.2). Third, since privacy is accounted on momentum, and
only the aggregated momentum leaks privacy, our solution
enjoys privacy amplification from client-level sampling.
The final privacy analysis of DP-BREM is shown in Theorem 1. It presents how to compute the privacy budget ε and
privacy parameter δ when the parameters (such as T , σ, q,
etc.) of the algorithm are given. We use an advanced privacy
accountant tool called Gaussian DP (GDP) [12], then convert it to (ε, δ)-DP. Note that in our privacy analysis, clients
can use different record-level sampling rates pi , thus different sensitivity Si shown in (14). Therefore, the final privacy
budget (denoted by εi ) of DP-BREM may be different for
different clients, which provides personalized privacy if these
parameters are different for each client.

Theorem 2 (Aggregation Error). Denote mt∗ := |H1 | ∑i∈H mt,i
as the ground truth aggregated raw momentum, where mt,i is
the client momentum computed from gradient without recordlevel clipping. Assume the local momentum of all honest
clients {mt,i }i∈H are i.i.d. with expectation µ := E[mt,i ], and
the variance is bounded (in terms of L2-norm)
E∥mt,i − µ ∥2 ⩽ ρ2

(17)

After some parameter tuning (the detailed tuning is shown
under (21) in Appendix F) of the clipping bounds:
 q

√
R ∝ O ρ n/(|B | + dσ/q) , C ∝ O(R)
(18)
we have the following aggregation error due to clipping, DP
noise, and Byzantine clients:
!
√
ρ2 (|B | + dσ/q)
∗ 2
E∥m̃t − mt ∥ ⩽ O
(19)
n
where |B | is the number of Byzantine clients, d is the dimension of model parameter θt , σ is the noise multiplier (for DP)
shown in (12), q is the client-level sampling rate shown in
Line-2 of Algorithm 1, and ρ is defined in (17). The formal
version of (19) is shown in (23) of Appendix F.
Proof. (Sketch) Directly bounding E∥m̃t − mt∗ ∥2 is not easy,
thus we utilize the upper bounds of E∥m̃t − µ ∥2 and E∥µ −
mt∗ ∥2 to get the final result, where µ := E[m
mt,i ] is the expected
local momentum (we assume clients’ local momentum are
i.i.d.). When upper bounding E∥m̃t − µ∥2 , we decompose
errors into three types: honest clients’ error (from clipping
randomness and bias), Byzantine clients’ error (from perturbation), and DP noise error. Optimizing parameters C and R
minimizes the total error. See Appendix F for the detailed
proof.

Theorem 1 (Privacy Analysis). DP-BREM (in Algorithm 1)
satisfies record-level (εi , δ)-DP for an honest client Ci with εi
7

Interpretation of Theorem 2. The value of E∥m̃t − mt∗ ∥2
quantifies the aggregation error, i.e., how the aggregated privatized momentum m̃t (with clipping, DP noise, and Byzantine
clients’ impact) differs from the "pure" momentum aggregation mt∗ , where only honest clients participate and without
clipping and DP noise. According to√(19), the aggregation
error is proportional to ρ2 and |Bn | + nqdσ , where ρ2 quanti-

Table 2: Comparison of Convergence Rate

fies the variance of honest clients’ local momentum, |Bn | is
σ
= O(1/ε) for ε-DP.
the fraction of Byzantine clients, and nq
In other words, the aggregation error will be enlarged when:
honest clients’ variance is large, or the Byzantine attacker corrupts more clients, or the training model is complex (i.e., the
model dimension d is large), or we need stronger privacy (i.e.,
a smaller ε), or the number √of clients n is small. Furthermore,
due to the format of |Bn | + nqdσ , the impact from DP noise is
independent of the increase of Byzantine clients |B | (versus
Limitation 2 of DP-LFH in Section 3.2). On the other hand,
according to the parameter tuning in (18), we could theoretically set a smaller record-level clipping bound R when σ, d,
and |B | are large, or ρ and n are small. The tuning of clientlevel clipping bound C should be adjusted according to the
value of R. Recall that R is for DP, while C is for robustness.
By following the convergence analysis in [23] and using
the result in (19), we have the convergence rate shown below.

s

√
ρ2 |B | + (1 + dσ)/q
T
n

Where to add noise
None

DP-LFH

Clients’ gradients

DP-BREM

Aggregated momentum

5

Convergence
Rate
p
O(ρ
1
+
|
B
|)


p
√
O (ρ + dσ) 1 + |B |
 q

√
O ρ 1 + |B | + dσ

DP-BREM+ with Secure Aggregation

The private and robust FL solution DP-BREM (in Section 4)
assumes a trusted server which can access clients’ momentum.
In this section, we propose DP-BREM+ , which assumes a
malicious server and utilizes secure aggregation techniques,
achieving the same DP and robustness guarantees as DPBREM. As discussed in Section 3.1, we consider the server
as malicious only for data privacy, while clients are malicious
for both data privacy and Byzantine attacks.

5.1

Challenges

Considering the server is malicious for data privacy, the noisy
aggregate of momentum with centered clipping shown in (12)
must be implemented securely with the goals of 1) privacy,
i.e., each party, including clients and the server, learns nothing
but the differentially-private output; and 2) integrity, i.e., the
output is correctly computed. Since the noisy aggregated
momentum of the previous iteration m̃t−1 already satisfies DP,
we can regard it as public information and only need to focus
on securely computing the term ∑i∈It ClipC (m̄t,i − m̃t−1 ) +
N (0, R2 σ2 Id ) in (12).
Secure Aggregation with Verified Inputs (SAVI). The
key crypto technique we leverage to achieve the above objectives is SAVI [36], which is a type of protocols that securely
aggregate only well-formed inputs. The security goals include
both privacy and integrity. Specifically, privacy means that no
party should be able to learn anything about the raw input of
an honest client, other than what can be learned from the final
aggregation result. Integrity means that the output of the protocol returns the correct aggregate of well-formed input, where
1) an input u passes the input integrity check with a public
validation predicate Valid(·) if and only if Valid(u) = 1, and
2) the aggregation is correctly computed. An instantiation of
the SAVI protocol is EIFFeL [36] (described in Appendix J).
Challenge: Secure Generation of Gaussian Noise. A
SAVI protocol can potentially solve the problem of securely
aggregating the clipped vectors (by enforcing a norm-bound
on the client momentum difference). However, the Gaussian
noise N (0, R2 σ2 Id ) needs to be securely generated and aggregated as well. In DP-BREM with a trusted server, the
Gaussian noise N (0, R2 σ2 Id ) is generated by the server to
guarantee DP. However, when the server is assumed as malicious, the added Gaussian noise for DP cannot be directly
generated by the server.

Theorem 3 (Convergence Rate of DP-BREM). The convergence rate of DP-BREM in Algorithm 1 is asymptotically
(ignoring constants and higher order terms) of the order
1 T
E∥∇ℓ(θt−1 )∥2 ≲
T ∑t=1

LFH [23]

(20)

where ℓ(·) is the loss function, T is the total number of training
iterations, and other parameters are the same as in (19).
Proof. See Appendix B.
Remark: comparison with LFH and DP-LFH. The convergence rate of the non-private LFH, DP-LFH, and the proposed solution DP-BREM, showing in (5), (8), and (20) respectively, are summarized in Table 2. Though
√ both DP-LFH
and DP-BREM pay an additional term of dσ/q to get the
DP property, they have different impacts on the convergence.
As √
discussed in Limitation 2 of Section 3.2, the additional
term dσ/q of DP-LFH (due to DP noise added to clients’
gradient) is on the term ρ, thus it will enlarge the impact of
Byzantine
√ clients (i.e., the term |B |). However, the additional
term dσ/q of our solution DP-BREM (due to DP noise
added to the aggregated momentum) is on the term 1 + |B |,
which has a squared-root order. Therefore, DP noise only has
a limited impact on the convergence of DP-BREM when there
are Byzantine clients. We will validate the above theoretical
analysis via experimental results in Section 6.
8

③

A straightforward approach is to use a semi-honest server,
as proposed in [37], to generate DP noise and manage the
privacy engine. However, relying on another non-colluding
server may be impractical, so we assume only a single server.
An alternative is Distributed DP [40], where clients locally
generate Gaussian noise. The aggregated noise follows a
Gaussian distribution with an enlarged standard deviation,
ensuring DP through cryptographic techniques. This method,
however, has two limitations: it requires more noise to achieve
the same privacy level due to potential collusion among malicious clients, and the robustness is compromised as malicious
clients can generate arbitrary local noise.
A possible solution to address the first limitation is to
jointly generate Gaussian noise as in [35], where no party
learns or controls the true value of the noise (or a portion of
the noise). However, the protocol in [35] is designed only for
additive secret sharing schemes, which only works for honestbut-curious parties and does not tolerate malicious parties.
Moreover, in [35], the Gaussian noise is jointly generated by
honest-but-curious and non-colluding parties, which does not
address the second limitation as the clients can be malicious
in our threat model discussed in Section 3.1.
Overview of DP-BREM+ . To achieve secure aggregation
with verified inputs and secure Gaussian noise generation
under the threat model of a malicious server and malicious
minority of clients, our DP-BREM+ 1) leverages an existing
SAVI protocol called EIFFeL [36] to achieve secure input
validation; and 2) introduces a new protocol to achieve secure
noise generation that is compatible with EIFFeL. The idea of
jointly generating Gaussian noise in DP-BREM+ is inspired
by [35], but our design is based on Shamir’s secret sharing
[38] with robust reconstruction by following the design in
EIFFeL, thus guarantees security under malicious minority.
We present the preliminaries of Shamir’s secret sharing and
EIFFeL protocol in Appendix J.

②

(⋅)

④

⑤

①

Phase 1: Secure
Input Validation

⑥Σ
Phase 2: Secure
Noise Generation

① Proof and Shares Generation
② Proof Summary Generation
③ Proof Summary Verification

Phase 3: Aggregation of
Valid Inputs and Noise

④ Random Numbers Generation
⑤ Transformation to Gaussian Distribution
⑥ Shares Aggregation
⑦ Noisy Aggregate Reconstruction

Figure 2: Illustration of DP-BREM+ (see Appendix C for
detailed steps 1
⃝- 7
⃝)
Phase 1: Secure Input Validation. The validation function for an input zi considered in DP-BREM+ is defined as
Valid(zzi ) := 1(∥zzi ∥ ⩽ C), where Valid(zzi ) = 1 if and only if
the condition ∥zzi ∥ ⩽ C holds. Since honest clients compute
zi = ClipC (m̄t,i − m̃t−1 ), verifying whether zi is well-formed,
with bounded L2-norm via Valid(·), for all clients ensures
centered clipping of client momentum m̄t,i (to achieve robustness as DP-BREM). We follow the design in EIFFeL [36]
for secure input validation, which returns the validation result
Valid(z i ) (either 1 or 0) for client Ci ’s private input z i , cor3 shown in Figure 2. Then,
responding to steps 1
⃝, 2
⃝, and ⃝
clients and the server can jointly verify all inputs {z i }i∈It , and
obtain the set of valid inputs IValid , where Valid(z i ) = 1 for all
i ∈ IValid . In the later step, only inputs in IValid are aggregated.
Phase 2: Secure Noise Generation. We develop a new protocol for secure distributed Gaussian noise generation, which
returns the shares (held by each client) of a random vector ξ
of length d from the Gaussian distribution N (0, R2 σ2 Id ), cor4 and ⃝
5 shown in Figure 2. The shares
responding to steps ⃝
of noise can be reconstructed into a single Gaussian noise
(for ensuring DP) with the guarantee that no parties know or
control the generated noise, which protects the information
of private inputs after the noisy aggregate is released.
Phase 3: Aggregation of Valid Inputs and Noise. Finally,
the server and clients can aggregate the valid inputs (obtained
in Phase 1) and the generated Gaussian noise (obtained in
6 and ⃝
7 shown in Figure 2,
Phase 2) by implementing steps ⃝
ensuring nothing except the noisy aggregate can be learned.
Remark on Efficiency. DP-BREM+ ’s usage of EIFFeL’s
secure input validation is due to efficiency considerations.
Instead of having clients perform clipping and using secure
input validation, one alternative is to use standard secure multiparty computation (MPC) for the clipping and aggregation.
However, doing this under MPC would result in a very large
computation/communication overhead due to the multiplication, min-operation, division, and L2-norm computation in
the clipping operation ClipC (·) defined in (4). In contrast, the
secure input validation protocol only requires the verifiers to
check all the multiplication gates very efficiently with just one

𝖵𝖺𝗅𝗂𝖽

5.2

⑦

Server

Server

Design of DP-BREM+

As discussed in Section 5.1, the main task of DP-BREM+
is to securely compute the term ∑i∈It ClipC (m̄t,i − m̃t−1 ) +
N (0, R2 σ2 Id ) shown in (12). After computing local momentum m̄t,i via (11), each client Ci first implements centered
clipping to get zi := ClipC (m̄t,i − m̃t−1 ), which is the private
input for validation and aggregation.
Three-Phase Design. In DP-BREM+ , clients and the server
jointly implement three phases: 1) secure input validation to
validate the client momentum is properly centered clipped by
C, 2) secure noise generation, where clients generate shares
of Gaussian noise which can be aggregated in Phase 3 to
ensure DP, and 3) aggregation of valid inputs and noise to
obtain the noisy global model. We assume the arithmetic
circuit is computed over a finite field F2K . The illustration of
DP-BREM+ is shown in Figure 2. Due to limited space, we
1 ⃝
7 in Appendix C.
present the detailed steps ⃝9

6

identity test. The compatibility with secure input validation is
one of the advantages of DP-BREM.
Complexity. According to EIFFeL [36], the computation/communication complexity of secure aggregation
with input validation is O(mnd) for clients and O(n2 +
md min{n, m2 }) for the server in terms of the number of
clients n, number of malicious clients m, and data dimension d. For the proposed secure noise generation (only clients
are involved), the computation/communication complexity
for total n clients is O(mnd).

5.3

In this section, we demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed DP-BREM/DP-BREM+ on achieving both good
privacy-utility tradeoff and Byzantine robustness via experimental results on MNIST [26], CIFAR-10 [25], and FEMNIST [8] datasets with non-IID setting (refer to Appendix
D for more details on the datasets and model architectures).
Note that MNIST and CIFAR-10 have 10 classes, while FEMNIST includes 62 classes. All experiments are developed via
PyTorch1 .
Byzantine Attacks. We consider four existing Byzantine attacks in our experiments, including ALIE ("a little
is enough") [3], IPM (inner-product manipulation) [46], LF
(label-flipping), and the state-of-the-art MTB ("manipulatingthe-Byzantine") [39]. Refer to Appendix D for more details.
Compared Methods. We compare the performance of six
approaches against Byzantine attacks, including DP-BREM/+
(our approach)2 , a variant of DP-FedSGD [31] with both
record and client norm clipping, DDP-RP [44], DP-RSA [51],
a variant of CM [48] with DP noise, and DP-LFH. The
comparison (on trust assumption and mechanism overview)
of these approaches is provided in Table 1, and Appendix
D shows more details of each approach. In summary, DPBREM/+ , DP-FedSGD, and DP-CM add central noise to the
aggregation, but DP-BREM+ does not require a trusted server
due to the secure aggregation technique. DDP-RP adds partial local noise to the client’s update with secure aggregation.
DP-RSA and DP-LFH add local noise to the client’s update.
We fix δ = 10−6 for (ε, δ)-DP in all experiments. For the
setting of other parameters, refer to Appendix E.
Evaluation Metric. We evaluate the testing accuracy of the
global model within T iterations. Considering the accuracy
curve might be unstable under Byzantine attacks, we average
the accuracy between 0.9T and T as the final accuracy for
comparison. Note that both DP noise and Byzantine attacks
reduce the accuracy. A protocol achieves good Byzantine
robustness if its accuracy does not decrease too much with an
increased number of Byzantine clients.

Security Analysis

In comparison, EIFFeL [36] is a secure aggregation protocol
with verified inputs (without guaranteeing DP), while our
solution DP-BREM+ is a secure noisy aggregation protocol
with verified inputs and jointly generated Gaussian noise,
which provides DP on the aggregated results. Therefore, the
only difference is the Gaussian noise that will be aggregated
to the final result. We show the formal security guarantee of
DP-BREM+ in the following theorem.
Theorem 4 (Security Guarantees of DP-BREM+ ). For the
validation function Valid(·) considered in Section 5.2, given
a security parameter κ, the secure noisy aggregation protocol
in DP-BREM+ satisfies:
1) Integrity. For a negligible function negl(·), the output of
the protocol returns the noisy aggregate of a subset of clients
IValid and Gaussian noise ξ, such that all clients in IValid have
well-formed inputs:
Pr[output = ∑i∈I

Valid

zi + ξ] ⩾ 1 − negl(κ)

where random vector ξ ∼ N (0, R2 σ2 Id ), and Valid(z i ) = 1
for all i ∈ IValid . Note that the set IValid contains all honest
clients (denoted by IH ) and the malicious clients who submitted well-formed input (denoted by IM∗ ), i.e., IValid = IH ∪ IM∗ .
2) Privacy. For a set of malicious clients IM and a malicious
server S, there exists a probabilistic polynomial-time (P.P.T.)
simulator Sim(·) such that:
Real ({zi }i∈IH , ΩIM ∪S ) ≡C Sim



∑i∈IH z i + ξ , IH , ΩIM ∪S

Experimental Evaluation

6.1

Robustness Evaluation with DP

We consider a fixed privacy budget ε and implement each attack with different percentages of Byzantine clients δB = |Bn |
for the four attacks, and compare the accuracy among all approaches. We note that a complex dataset requires a more sophisticated model architecture and makes it more challenging
to maintain good utility in the presence of DP and Byzantine
attacks. Therefore, in our experiments with CIFAR-10 (which



where {zi }i∈IH denotes the input of all the honest clients, Real
denotes a random variable representing the joint view of all
the parties in the protocol’s execution, ΩIM ∪S indicates a
polynomial-time algorithm implementing the "next-message"
function of the parties in IM ∪ S (see [36, Appendix 11.5]),
and ≡C denotes computational indistinguishability. In summary, the server and clients learn nothing besides the final
aggregated result.

1 Our source code is available at https://github.com/xiaolangu/DP-BREM
2 Since DP-BREM+ achieves the same DP and robustness guarantees
as DP-BREM, we did not perform the empirical experiments with secure
aggregation because the accuracy results will be exactly the same as DPBREM. We use DP-BREM/+ to denote both DP-BREM and DP-BREM+ ,
and the implementation follows Algorithm 1.

Proof. See Appendix K.
10

DP-BREM/

DP-FedSGD

DP-CM

CIFAR-10 ( = 4)
Accuracy

MNIST ( = 3)
Accuracy

Attack=ALIE

DP-RSA

Attack=IPM

DP-LFH

Attack=LF

Attack=MTB

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
DP-FedSGD
DP-CM
DDP-RP
DP-RSA
DP-LFH
0.0 DP-BREM/
0%
10%
20%
30% 0%
10%
20%
30% 0%
10%
20%
30% 0%
10%
20%
30%
Attack=ALIE
Attack=IPM
Attack=LF
Attack=MTB
Byzantine Clients B (%)
Byzantine Clients B (%)
Byzantine Clients B (%)
0.5 Byzantine Clients B (%)

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1 DP-BREM/

0.8

FEMNIST ( = 4)
Accuracy

DDP-RP

0%

DP-FedSGD
DP-CM
DDP-RP
DP-LFH
10%
15%
20%
0%
10%
15%
20%
0%
10%
15%
Attack=ALIE
Attack=IPM
Attack=LF

20% 0%

10%

20% 0%

Byzantine Clients B (%)

Byzantine Clients B (%)

Byzantine Clients B (%)

10%
15%
20%
Attack=MTB
Byzantine Clients B (%)

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

0%

15%

Byzantine Clients B

20% 0%

10%

15%

Byzantine Clients B

20% 0%

10%

15%

Byzantine Clients B

10%

15%

Byzantine Clients B

20%

Figure 3: With fixed privacy budget ε, varying the percentage of Byzantine clients δB for three datasets.
has three color channels) and FEMNIST (which includes 62
classes), we use slightly larger ε values and a smaller number
of Byzantine clients. These choices are still within a reasonable range. Previous papers, such as [1] and [50], also
used larger privacy budgets for the CIFAR-10 dataset compared to the MNIST dataset. The results for MNIST (with
ε = 3), CIFAR-10 (with ε = 4), and FEMNIST (with ε = 4)
datasets are shown in Figure 3. Compared to the results on the
MNIST dataset (with 10 classes), the accuracy on the FEMNIST dataset is lower due to the larger number of classes.
Though the detailed results vary under different attacks and
across three datasets, we have some general observations:
1) When there is no attack, i.e., δB = 0, DP-BREM/+
achieves almost the same accuracy as DP-FedSGD, indicating
the Byzantine-robust design (client momentum with centered
clipping) has almost no impact on the utility in this case.
2) After increasing δB , our DP-BREM/+ has the smallest
accuracy decrease, indicating its success in providing Byzantine robustness. However, the accuracy of DP-LFH reduces
sharply, demonstrating that the large aggregated local DP
noise makes the robust aggregator more vulnerable to Byzantine attacks, which is consistent with our discussions of Limitation 2 in Section 3.2.
3) Though DP-FedSGD has client-level gradient clipping,
which can restrict malicious clients’ impact, it is still vulner-

able to some types of Byzantine attacks (such as IPM and
MTB) under larger δB values.
4) CM with DP noise (or DP-CM) has a relatively small
accuracy decrease for a relatively small δB . It is the benefit
of the median-based robust aggregator. But the sensitivity
is larger than the average-based aggregators, as discussed in
Example 1, the aggregated DP noise is too large to obtain a
high accuracy, even when δB = 0.
5) DDP-RP is more vulnerable to LF attack because it only
checks the element-wise range. Also, the model replacement
strategy in LF attack is more likely to change the positions
that have small values in benign gradient vectors.
6) DP-RSA has relatively poor accuracy compared to other
approaches, even when δB = 0. This is caused by the signSGD aggregator, which only aggregates element-wise signs
rather than the full precision gradient, leading to large information loss. Moreover, the local DP noise makes Byzantine
attacks easier to succeed. We note that DP-RSA does not converge for the FEMNIST dataset (possibly caused by the sign
aggregation), even without DP noise and Byzantine clients,
and thus we do not present the results for this dataset.
7) Under the ALIE attack, it is possible for a small number
of Byzantine clients to improve the accuracy of the model
compared to the scenario without any Byzantine clients. For
instance, an ALIE attack with 10% Byzantine clients can
11

DP-BREM/

DP-FedSGD

DP-CM

CIFAR-10 ( B = 15%)
Accuracy

MNIST ( B = 30%)
Accuracy

Attack=ALIE

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
DP-FedSGD
0.0DP-BREM/
1
3
8
inf
Attack=ALIE
Privacy Budget
0.5

DP-RSA

Attack=IPM

Attack=LF

DP-CM
1

DP-LFH

DDP-RP
3
8
inf
Attack=IPM

Attack=MTB

DP-RSA
DP-LFH
1
3Attack=LF8

inf

1

3
8
Attack=MTB
Privacy Budget

inf

DDP-RP
4
9
inf
Attack=IPM

DP-LFH
2
4Attack=LF9

inf

2

4
9
Attack=MTB
Privacy Budget

inf

4

2

inf

2

Privacy Budget

Privacy Budget

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1 DP-BREM/

0.8

FEMNIST ( B = 15%)
Accuracy

DDP-RP

2

DP-FedSGD
4
9
inf
Attack=ALIE

2

4

2

Privacy Budget

DP-CM

Privacy Budget

Privacy Budget

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

2

9

Privacy Budget

inf

9

Privacy Budget

inf

4

9

Privacy Budget

4

9

Privacy Budget

inf

Figure 4: With fixed percentage of Byzantine clients δB , varying privacy budget ε for three datasets.
achieve higher accuracy than the case with 0% Byzantine
clients across all defense aggregators except DP-LFH. This
improvement occurs because the ALIE attack generates malicious gradients that are close to the averaged good gradients but deviate slightly using a scaling factor. This factor is
determined based on the total number of clients and the proportion of Byzantine clients, designed to bypass any anomaly
detection mechanisms employed by the central server. Consequently, when the number of Byzantine clients is relatively
small, the malicious gradients can enhance model accuracy
compared to benign gradients, where the record-level clipping
is used to achieve DP.

6.2

It’s essential to highlight that while the privacy-utility curve
is generally monotonic in the absence of Byzantine attacks,
this may not hold under Byzantine attacks due to two sources
of perturbation. When malicious perturbation dominates, the
impact of DP noise on utility is typically minimal. Additionally, different defense aggregators exhibit varying sensitivities to malicious perturbation and DP noise across various
datasets, even when the number of malicious clients and ε values are the same. Consequently, observations can vary across
defense aggregators, attacks, and datasets (with different parameters). For example, DP noise has a very small (or almost
negligible) impact on DP-FedSGD compared to DP-BREM.
This could be because DP-FedSGD aggregates more information than the momentum-based solution, leading to a better
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and thus greater robustness to DP
noise. However, the attack has a more significant impact on
DP-FedSGD.
Though the detailed results vary under different attacks and
across the three datasets, DP-BREM/+ generally achieves the
highest accuracy among almost all approaches, especially under IPM and MTB attacks. The only exception is when ε = 2
for the FEMNIST dataset, where the accuracy of DP-BREM/+
is lower than that of DP-FedSGD. This is because the client
momentum in DP-BREM/+ restricts the information that can
be learned from each new iteration, making the increased DP

Privacy-Utility Tradeoff under Attack

We consider a fixed percentage of Byzantine clients δB for
each attack under different values of privacy budget ε, and
compare the accuracy of all approaches. The results for
MNIST (with δB = 30%), CIFAR-10 (with δB = 15%), and
FEMNIST (with δB = 15%) datasets are shown in Figure
4. For all three datasets, we consider four different levels of
privacy, where ε = inf means the standard deviation of DP
noise is 0. However, we still implement record-level clipping
to illustrate how the noise affects the results while keeping
other settings including the clipping step the same.
12

Accuracy

= 1, B = 30%
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

= 1, B = 20%

Attack=ALIE

3

5

10

Clipping Norm Bound R

= 3, B = 30%

= 3, B = 20%

Attack=IPM

15

3

5

Attack=LF

10

15

Clipping Norm Bound R

3

5

10

Clipping Norm Bound R

Attack=MTB

15

3

5

10

Clipping Norm Bound R

15

Figure 5: MNIST: Varying record-level clipping bound R for DP-BREM under different settings.
Table 3: Running time1 (in milliseconds) per round per client on
the MNIST dataset.
Batch
Size
30
60
120

Baseline

FedSGD+DP

DP-BREM

FedSGD+DP

(FedSGD)

(efficient2 )

(DP+robust)

(inefficient3 )

11.80
18.23
31.22

13.31
19.79
33.18

13.72
20.27
33.70

41.06
76.70
149.32

1 Our GPU device is NVIDIA Tesla P100-PCIE-16GB. Using other GPU

devices may have different results.

Table 4: Model accuracy when varying C of DP-BREM/+ with
ε = 4 under IPM and MTB attacks on FEMNIST dataset.
δB
0%
IPM 10%
IPM 20%
MTB 10%
MTB 20%

C = 0.5
0.622
0.407
0.060
0.591
0.554

C=1
0.647
0.524
0.305
0.605
0.537

C=2
0.625
0.555
0.436
0.535
0.477

C=3
0.621
0.528
0.413
0.525
0.426

C=4
0.627
0.514
0.392
0.545
0.426

2 By default, our implementation uses efficient per-record gradient clipping

by following Opacus library’s implementation with parallel clipping and
optimized einsum (refer to https://opacus.ai/api/_modules/opacus/
optimizers/optimizer.html#DPOptimizer)
3 To illustrate the improvement of efficient clipping, we also show the results
of the inefficient implementation, which clips per-record gradient sequentially and without using optimized einsum.

noise have a greater impact on the model’s accuracy.
Note that when σ = 0 (i.e., ε = inf), both DP-BREM/+ and
DP-LFH reduce to LFH, thus they have the same results in
this case. We can observe that with a moderate privacy budget,
such as ε ⩾ 2, DP noise only has a negligible impact on the
accuracy. But if ε is too small, such as ε = 1 for the MNIST
dataset in Figure 4, DP-BREM/+ suffers a relatively larger impact (but still acceptable) from DP noise. Note that when there
exist Byzantine attacks, reducing the DP noise to σ = 0 (i.e.,
ε = inf) does not significantly improve the accuracy of DPBREM/+ compared with ε < inf, because Byzantine clients’
perturbations largely impact the performance. However, the
accuracy of DP-LFH is greatly reduced when ε < inf, since
the local DP noise impacts the robustness of the aggregator.
This observation is consistent with our theoretical analysis in
Limitation 2 of DP-LFH (Section 3.2).

6.3

Other Results

Efficiency Evaluation of DP and Byzantine Robustness.
We note that DP and Byzantine Robustness designs in our solution only introduce a small computation overhead, because
1) the clipping step of DP can be implemented efficiently; 2)
our robustness is essentially a clipped summation of client
momentum without any complex computations. Due to limited resources, we implemented the distributed training of
13

FL on a single machine (by running all the clients and the
server code sequentially). We evaluate the efficiency of DPBREM via the running time (per round per client) on the
MNIST dataset. The results shown in Table 3 indicate that
the DP noise and Byzantine robustness only incur 8% ∼ 16%
additional running time (depending on batch size).
Impact of R in DP-BREM/+ . Figure 5 shows how the
accuracy changes w.r.t. the record-level clipping bound R
in DP-BREM/+ . The results demonstrate that when there
are fewer Byzantine clients (i.e., smaller δB ) or the noise
multiplier σ is smaller (i.e., larger ε), we need to set a larger
R to obtain better accuracy. This observation is consistent
with the theoretical analysis of parameter tuning discussed in
Theorem 2 and its interpretation.
Impact of C in DP-BREM/+ . We use the fixed client-level
clipping bound C for each dataset in previous experiments.
Table 4 illustrates how varying values of C (while keeping
the default and fixed R) can influence model accuracy. In the
absence of Byzantine attacks, the value of C has a relatively
small impact on the model accuracy. However, in the presence
of Byzantine attacks, the effect of C varies depending on the
nature of the attack. For instance, attacks like the IPM attack,
which deviate significantly from benign gradients, benefit
from a slightly larger C as it allows more useful information
(from benign clients) to be retained. Conversely, for attacks
like the MTB attack, which aim to evade detection by aligning
more closely with benign gradients, a slightly smaller C can
improve accuracy by reducing the impact of the attack on the
aggregated gradient.
Impact of q in DP-BREM/+ . In previous experiments, we
set client-level sampling rate q = 1 by default. As discussed

as DP-BREM, under a malicious server (for privacy) and malicious minority clients. We theoretically analyze the error
and convergence of DP-BREM, and conduct extensive experiments that empirically show the advantage of DP-BREM/+
in terms of privacy-utility tradeoff and Byzantine robustness
over five baseline protocols. In the future, we will extend our
work to other types of robust aggregators.

Table 5: Model accuracy when varying q of DP-BREM/+ with
ε = 2 under MTB attack on the CIFAR-10 dataset.
δB
0%
10%
20%

q=1
0.503
0.435
0.255

q = 0.8
0.525
0.434
0.284

q = 0.6
0.504
0.465
0.297

q = 0.4
0.491
0.449
0.328

q = 0.2
0.485
0.438
0.241

in Sec. 4.1, aggregating a subset It of clients in (12) is one
of the major differences from LFH. Table 5 demonstrates
the utility improvement by optimizing q under different attack percentages δB . Intuitively, without attacks, a smaller q
enhances privacy amplification, reducing the required σ for
a given ε in DP; however, too small a q increases aggregation variance. Under Byzantine attacks, a smaller q mitigates
attack impact as only a subset of Byzantine clients are aggregated. Thus, with higher δB the optimal q (highlighted in
Table 5) decreases.

7

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers and
the shepherd for their valuable comments and suggestions. Li
Xiong was partly supported by NSF grants CNS-2124104,
CNS-2125530, IIS-2302968, and NIH grants R01LM013712,
R01ES033241.

References
[1] Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H Brendan
McMahan, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and Li Zhang.
Deep learning with differential privacy. In ACM SIGSAC
Conference on Computer and Communications Security
(CCS), 2016.

Related Work

Due to limited space, we only discuss the most relevant defenses below and put other related work in Appendix M. Other
works either only achieve DP or Byzantine robustness (but
not both), or combine secure aggregation with Byzantine robustness without realizing DP.
Wang et al. [44] proposed DDP-RP, an FL scheme offering
Distributed DP (via encryption) and robustness (via rangeproof technologies). However, this scheme only verifies if
local model weights are within a bounded range, providing
weak robustness. Our solution, in contrast, employs client
momentum and centered clipping for Byzantine robustness
with provable convergence. Zhu et al. [51] uses sign aggregation for robustness, thus each client has limited impact, and
adds DP noise to local gradients before sign operations. This
method suffers from information loss, resulting in degraded
convergence, and only accounts for the privacy cost of one
iteration, underestimating the overall cost. Our solution, based
on original SGD with momentum, considers the privacy cost
of all iterations. Experimental results show that DP-BREM
outperforms both approaches.

8

[2] Eugene Bagdasaryan, Andreas Veit, Yiqing Hua, Deborah Estrin, and Vitaly Shmatikov. How to backdoor
federated learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), 2020.
[3] Gilad Baruch, Moran Baruch, and Yoav Goldberg. A
little is enough: Circumventing defenses for distributed
learning. In Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS), 2019.
[4] Abhishek Bhowmick, John Duchi, Julien Freudiger,
Gaurav Kapoor, and Ryan Rogers. Protection against
reconstruction and its applications in private federated
learning. arXiv preprint, 2018.
[5] Peva Blanchard, El Mahdi El Mhamdi, Rachid Guerraoui, and Julien Stainer. Machine learning with adversaries: Byzantine tolerant gradient descent. In NeurIPS,
2017.
[6] George EP Box and Mervin E Muller. A note on the
generation of random normal deviates. The annals of
mathematical statistics, 1958.

Conclusions

This paper aims to achieve FL in the cross-silo setting with
both DP and Byzantine robustness. We first proposed DPBREM, a DP version of LFH-based FL protocol with a robust
aggregator based on client momentum, where the server adds
noise to the aggregated momentum. Then we further developed DP-BREM+ which relaxes the server’s trust assumption,
by combining secure aggregation techniques with verifiable
inputs and a new protocol for secure joint noise generation.
DP-BREM+ achieves the same DP and robustness guarantees

[7] Zhiqi Bu, Jinshuo Dong, Qi Long, and Weijie J Su. Deep
learning with gaussian differential privacy. Harvard
Data Science Review, 2020(23), 2020.
[8] Sebastian Caldas, Sai Meher Karthik Duddu, Peter Wu,
Tian Li, Jakub Konečnỳ, H Brendan McMahan, Virginia
Smith, and Ameet Talwalkar. Leaf: A benchmark for
federated settings. arXiv preprint, 2018.
14

[9] Yudong Chen, Lili Su, and Jiaming Xu. Distributed statistical machine learning in adversarial settings: Byzantine gradient descent. In ACM on Measurement and
Analysis of Computing Systems, 2017.

[22] Peter Kairouz, H Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent,
Aurélien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin Bhagoji,
Kallista Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode,
Rachel Cummings, et al. Advances and open problems
in federated learning. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 14(1–2), 2021.

[10] Henry Corrigan-Gibbs and Dan Boneh. Prio: Private,
robust, and scalable computation of aggregate statistics.
In USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design
and Implementation (NSDI), 2017.

[23] Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Lie He, and Martin Jaggi.
Learning from history for byzantine robust optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), 2021.

[11] Ronald Cramer, Ivan Damgård, and Yuval Ishai. Share
conversion, pseudorandom secret-sharing and applications to secure computation. In Theory of Cryptography
Conference (TCC), 2005.

[24] Marcel Keller. MP-SPDZ: A versatile framework for
multi-party computation. In CCS, 2020.

[12] Jinshuo Dong, Aaron Roth, and Weijie J Su. Gaussian
differential privacy. Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 2019.

[25] Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
[26] Yann LeCun. The mnist database of handwritten digits.
1998.

[13] Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and
Adam Smith. Calibrating noise to sensitivity in private
data analysis. In Theory of Cryptography Conference
(TCC), 2006.

[27] Jeffrey Li, Mikhail Khodak, Sebastian Caldas, and
Ameet Talwalkar. Differentially private meta-learning.
In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.

[14] Cynthia Dwork, Aaron Roth, et al. The algorithmic
foundations of differential privacy. Now Publishers,
2014.

[28] Shu Lin and Daniel J Costello. Error control coding.
Prentice hall Lebanon, IN, 2001.

[15] Cynthia Dwork, Guy N Rothblum, and Salil Vadhan.
Boosting and differential privacy. In FOCS, 2010.

[29] Yehuda Lindell and Ariel Nof. A framework for constructing fast mpc over arithmetic circuits with malicious
adversaries and an honest-majority. In CCS, 2017.

[16] Minghong Fang, Xiaoyu Cao, Jinyuan Jia, and Neil
Gong. Local model poisoning attacks to byzantinerobust federated learning. In USENIX Security Symposium, 2020.

[30] Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth
Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas. Communicationefficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
data. In AISTATS, 2017.

[17] Paul Feldman. A practical scheme for non-interactive
verifiable secret sharing. In IEEE Annual Symposium on
Foundations of Computer Science (SFCS), pages 427–
438, 1987.

[31] H Brendan McMahan, Daniel Ramage, Kunal Talwar,
and Li Zhang. Learning differentially private recurrent
language models. In ICLR, 2018.

[18] Shuhong Gao. A new algorithm for decoding reedsolomon codes. Communications, information and network security, pages 55–68, 2003.

[32] Luca Melis, Congzheng Song, Emiliano De Cristofaro,
and Vitaly Shmatikov. Exploiting unintended feature
leakage in collaborative learning. In IEEE Symposium
on Security and Privacy (S&P), 2019.

[19] Robin C Geyer, Tassilo Klein, and Moin Nabi. Differentially private federated learning: A client level perspective. arXiv preprint, 2017.

[33] El Mahdi El Mhamdi, Rachid Guerraoui, and Sébastien
Rouault. The hidden vulnerability of distributed learning
in byzantium. In ICML, 2018.

[20] Rachid Guerraoui, Nirupam Gupta, Rafaël Pinot,
Sébastien Rouault, and John Stephan. Differential privacy and byzantine resilience in sgd: Do they add up?
In ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, 2021.

[34] Ilya Mironov. Rényi differential privacy. In CSF, 2017.
[35] Sikha Pentyala, Davis Railsback, Ricardo Maia, Rafael
Dowsley, David Melanson, Anderson Nascimento, and
Martine De Cock. Training differentially private models
with secure multiparty computation. arXiv preprint,
2022.

[21] Lie He, Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, and Martin Jaggi. Secure byzantine-robust machine learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.04747, 2020.
15

[36] Amrita Roy Chowdhury, Chuan Guo, Somesh Jha, and
Laurens van der Maaten. EIFFeL: Ensuring integrity
for federated learning. In CCS, 2022.

[48] Dong Yin, Yudong Chen, Ramchandran Kannan, and
Peter Bartlett. Byzantine-robust distributed learning:
Towards optimal statistical rates. In ICML, 2018.

[37] Amrita Roy Chowdhury, Chenghong Wang, Xi He, Ashwin Machanavajjhala, and Somesh Jha. Crypte: Cryptoassisted differential privacy on untrusted servers. In
ACM Special Interest Group on Management of Data
(SIGMOD), 2020.

[49] Hongxu Yin, Arun Mallya, Arash Vahdat, Jose M Alvarez, Jan Kautz, and Pavlo Molchanov. See through
gradients: Image batch recovery via gradinversion. In
IEEE / CVF Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Conference (CVPR), 2021.

[38] Adi Shamir. How to share a secret. Communications of
the ACM, 22(11):612–613, 1979.

[50] Qinqing Zheng, Shuxiao Chen, Qi Long, and Weijie Su.
Federated f-differential privacy. In AISTATS, 2021.

[39] Virat Shejwalkar and Amir Houmansadr. Manipulating the byzantine: Optimizing model poisoning attacks
and defenses for federated learning. In Network and
Distributed System Security (NDSS), 2021.

[51] Heng Zhu and Qing Ling. Bridging differential privacy
and byzantine-robustness via model aggregation. In
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(IJCAI), 2022.

[40] Elaine Shi, TH Hubert Chan, Eleanor Rieffel, Richard
Chow, and Dawn Song. Privacy-preserving aggregation
of time-series data. In NDSS, 2011.

[52] Ligeng Zhu, Zhijian Liu, and Song Han. Deep leakage
from gradients. In NeurIPS, 2019.

[41] Jinhyun So, Başak Güler, and A Salman Avestimehr.
Byzantine-resilient secure federated learning. IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 2020.

A

Proof of Theorem 1 (Privacy Analysis)

[42] Stacey Truex, Nathalie Baracaldo, Ali Anwar, Thomas
Steinke, Heiko Ludwig, Rui Zhang, and Yi Zhou. A
hybrid approach to privacy-preserving federated learning. In ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and
Security, 2019.

Proof. Since the added Gaussian noise in (12) has standard
deviation Rσ, and the aggregation sensitivity is shown in
(14), then the noise multiplier (defined by the ratio between
Gaussian noise’s standard deviation and the sensitivity) is

[43] Raj Kiriti Velicheti, Derek Xia, and Oluwasanmi Koyejo.
Secure byzantine-robust distributed learning via clustering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.02940, 2021.

σi =





Rσ
R
Rσ
= max
, σpi |Di | = σ · max
, pi |Di |
Si
2C
2C

Also, due to the client-level sampling (i.e., each client was
selected by the server w.p. q) and record-level sampling (i.e.,
each record was selected by client Ci w.p. pi ), the overall sampling rate is qpi . Then, by applying the privacy accountant
of Gaussian DP [12] (Lemma 10 in Appendix I), DP-BREM
satisfies µi -GDP with µi shown in (16). Finally, by converting µi -GDP to (εi , δ)-DP via Lemma 9, we get (15), which
finishes the proof.

[44] Fayao Wang, Yuanyuan He, Yunchuan Guo, Peizhi Li,
and Xinyu Wei. Privacy-preserving robust federated
learning with distributed differential privacy. In IEEE
International Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy
in Computing and Communications (TrustCom), 2022.
[45] Hongyi Wang, Kartik Sreenivasan, Shashank Rajput,
Harit Vishwakarma, Saurabh Agarwal, Jy-yong Sohn,
Kangwook Lee, and Dimitris S Papailiopoulos. Attack
of the tails: Yes, you really can backdoor federated learning. In NeurIPS, 2020.

Remark: privacy accountant in practice. Eq. (15) provides the formula of δ when εi is given and µi is computed
from (16). In practice, however, we need to compute the value
of privacy budget εi with a fixed δ, where δ is conventionally set to be less than 1/n. In our experiments, we utilize
the computation tool3 in [7] to solve εi from (15). For the
R
value of σi in (16), we usually have pi |Di | > 2C
in practice,
then σi = σpi |Di |. In this case, the clipping bounds R and
C are just hyperparameters that may affect the utility of the
algorithm, but has no influence on the privacy analysis.

[46] Cong Xie, Oluwasanmi Koyejo, and Indranil Gupta. Fall
of empires: Breaking byzantine-tolerant sgd by inner
product manipulation. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2020.
[47] Runhua Xu, Nathalie Baracaldo, Yi Zhou, Ali Anwar,
and Heiko Ludwig. Hybridalpha: An efficient approach
for privacy-preserving federated learning. In ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and Security, 2019.

3 https://github.com/woodyx218/Deep-Learning-with-GDP-Pytorch

16

B

Proof of Theorem 3 (Convergence Rate)

denoted by a binary vector b i with length l, then generate
and distributes the shares [b i ] j to other clients (via Shamir’s
secret sharing). After receiving all shares from other
clients, each client C j (∀ j) locally adds these shares to get
[b ] j = [∑i b i ] j ∈ Fl2 , where vector b ∈ Fl2 is actually the
bitwise XOR of vectors {b i }∀i because the computation is
implemented in the binary field Fl2 . We define the binary
vector b as the binary representation of the fractional part of
u ∈ [0, 1]. Note that the Shamir’s secret sharing scheme of
Phase 1 is implemented in a finite filed F2K , where K > l.
Therefore, the client C j can locally compute the arithmetic
share [u] j ∈ F2K from the share of binary representation
[b ] j ∈ Fl2 . Since all possible discrete values with power 2
ring representation evenly span the range [0, 1], the generated
random real number u is uniformly distributed in [0, 1].
5
⃝
Transformation
to
Gaussian
Distribution:
⌈d/2⌉
{([uk ] j , [vk ] j )}k=1
(∀ j) → [ξ ] j (∀ j).
For each
pair of (uk , vk ), clients pcan jointly compute a secret p
sharing of ak =
−2 ln(uk ) · cos(2πvk ) and of
bk = −2 ln(uk ) · sin(2πvk ) by utilizing Secure Multiparty
Computation (MPC) protocols [24] that guarantees security
(i.e., privacy and integrity) with malicious minority. According to Box and Muller Transformation [6], ak and bk are
i.i.d. random variables from the Gaussian distribution with
mean 0 and variance 1. Then, by locally implementing secure
multiplication with a constant (i.e., Rσ), ak and bk are i.i.d
random numbers following a Gaussian distribution with the
desired standard deviation of Rσ. Finally, by concatenating
⌈d/2⌉
shares of d numbers in {(ak , bk )}k=1 , clients obtains the
shares of random vector ξ with length d from Gaussian
distribution N (0, R2 σ2 Id ).
6
⃝ Shares Aggregation: {[z i ] j }i∈IValid , [ξ ] j (∀ j) →
[∑i∈IValid z i + ξ ] j (∀ j). Due to the linearity of Shamir’s secret sharing scheme, each client C j can locally compute the
share of the noisy aggregate by adding the shares of all valid
inputs and the share of Gaussian noise: [∑i∈IValid z i + ξ ] j =
∑i∈IValid [z i ] j + [ξ ] j , and sends that share to the server.
7
⃝ Noisy Aggregate Reconstruction: [∑i∈IValid z i +
ξ ] j (∀ j) → ∑i∈IValid z i + ξ . After receiving all shares of
the noisy aggregate, the server recovers it using robust
reconstruction.

Proof. The proof of DP-BREM’s convergence rate is based
on the result of DP-BREM’s aggregation error shown in Theorem 2, and LFH’s convergence rate derived from LFH’s aggregation error. Note that all differences between DP-BREM
and LFH, including per-record clipping and the DP noise, are
reflected by the aggregation error. Comparing with the aggregation error of O(ρ2 |B |/n) (ignoring constants and higher
order terms) in LFH [23, Lemma 9], our aggregation
error
√
shown in (19) replaces the term |B | by |B | + dσ/q, which
means a slower convergence due to DP noise. Then, following
the result in [23, Theorem VI] and its informal version in (5),
we get the convergence rate of our algorithm as in (20). Note
that our aggregation utilizes a client-level sampling rate q,
i.e., approximate nq clients participate in the aggregation for
1
one iteration. We need to replace the term of 1n in (5) by nq
in
(20).

C

Detailed Steps of DP-BREM+ in Figure 2

1
⃝
Proof and Shares Generation: z i , Valid(·) →
[z i ] j , [πi ] j (∀ j ̸= i). For generating the proof, client Ci
first evaluates the circuit Valid(·) on its private input z i
to obtain the value of every wire in the arithmetic circuit
corresponding to the computation of Valid(z i ), then uses
these wire values to generate the proof πi (refer to [10, 36] for
the detailed format). Then, client Ci splits the private input
z i and proof πi to generate shares [z i ] j and [πi ] j (∀ j ̸= i),
and send them to other clients {C j }∀ j̸=i via Shamir’s secret
sharing.
2
⃝ Proof Summary Computation: [z i ] j , [πi ] j (∀ j ̸= i) →
[σi ] j (∀ j ̸= i). Each client except Ci first verifies the validity of
the received secret shares via verifiable secret shares [17], and
then locally constructs the shares of every wire in Valid(z i )
via affine operations on the shares [z i ] j and[πi ] j to get the
shares of proof summary [σi ] j (refer to [36] for the detailed
format), which will be sent to the server.
3
⃝ Proof Summary Verification: [σi ] j (∀ j ̸= i) → Valid(z i ).
After receiving shares of proof summary [σi ] j (∀ j ̸= i) from
clients {C j }∀ j̸=i , the server recovers the value of σi via robust
reconstruction, which is resilient to incorrect shares submitted
by the malicious clients, and then checks the values in proof
summaries. Finally, the validation result Valid(z i ) = 1 if and
only if σi has the correct value.
4
⃝
Random
Numbers
Generation:
l, d →
⌈d/2⌉
{([uk ] j , [vk ] j )}k=1 (∀ j). In this step, clients jointly
generate the shares of ⌈d/2⌉-pairs of random numbers
⌈d/2⌉
{(uk , vk )}k=1 , where all of them are i.i.d. from uniform
distribution in the range [0, 1]. Denote l as the fractional
precision of the power 2 ring representation of real numbers.
To obtain the share of one random number u, each client
Ci (∀i) generates l random bits in the binary filed F2 ,

D

Experimental Setup

FL Implementation. Due to limited resources, we simulate
the distributed training of FL by running a single machine
sequentially for clients and the server. The real-world implementation of FL is out of the scope of this paper.
Datasets (non-IID) and Model Architecture. We use
three datasets for our experiments: MNIST [26] CIFAR10 [25] and FEMNIST [8], where the number of total clients
is n = 100 for the former two datasets, and n = 400 for FEMNIST dataset. Note that the MNIST and CIFAR-10 datasets
17

only have 10 classes, while the FEMNIST dataset has 62
classes (including 10 digits, 26 lowercase letters, and 26 uppercase letters). For the MNIST dataset, we use the CNN
model from PyTorch example4 . For the CIFAR-10 dataset,
we use the CNN model from the TensorFlow tutorial5 , like
the previous works [31, 50]. To simulate the heterogeneous
data distributions, we make non-i.i.d. partitions of the datasets,
which is a similar setup as [50] and is described below. For the
FEMNIST dataset, we use a CNN model with 2 convolution
layers and 2 fully connected layers.
1) Non-IID MNIST: The MNIST dataset contains 60,000
training images and 10,000 testing images of 10 classes. There
are 100 clients, each holds 600 training images. We sort the
training data by digit label and evenly divide it into 400 shards.
Each client is assigned four random shards of the data, so that
most of the clients have examples of three or four digits.
2) Non-IID CIFAR-10: The CIFAR-10 dataset contains
50,000 training images and 10,000 test images of 10 classes.
There are 100 clients, each holds 500 training images. We
sample the training images for each client using a Dirichlet
distribution with hyperparameter 0.9.
3) Non-IID FEMNIST: The FEMNIST dataset is prepartitioned based on the writer of the characters, simulating
a non-IID scenario. Each client’s local dataset consists of
samples written by individual users, introducing variability in
handwriting styles. We use the TensorFlow-Federated API6
to load the first 400 partitions, representing data from 400
clients. Unlike the MNIST dataset, which includes only digits,
FEMNIST includes both digits and uppercase and lowercase
letters, spanning 62 classes (10 digits + 52 letters).
Byzantine Attacks. We consider four different Byzantine
attacks in our experiments.
1) ALIE ("a little is enough") [3]. The attacker uses the empirical variance (estimated from the data of corrupted clients)
to determine the perturbation range, in which the attack can
deviate from the mean without being detected or filtered out.
2) IPM (inner-product manipulation) [46]. The attacker
manipulates the submitted gradient to be the negative direction of the mean of other honest clients’ gradients, thus the
negative inner-product of the true gradient and the aggregation prevents the descent of the loss. Note that the original
IPM attack assumes the omniscient attacker (i.e., knows the
data/gradient of all other clients), which is contradicted to our
assumption that the attacker only has access to the data of the
corrupted clients (otherwise, the privacy is already leaked and
no need to provide DP). Thus, in the experiments, we use the
data of corrupted clients to estimate the aggregated gradient
of honest clients, and then manipulate the inner-product (i.e.,
non-omniscient attack).
3) LF (label-flipping). The attacker modifies the labels of

all examples of corrupted clients’ data and computes a new
gradient, then uses a gradient replacement strategy (similar
to [2]) to enhance the impact on the global model. Specifically,
the attacker computes a benign gradient gbenign with nonflipped labels and also a bad gradient gbad with flipped labels.
Finally, each malicious client submits the difference gbad −
gbenign to the server to achieve the goal that the aggregated
global gradient (averaged over all clients) is close to gbad .
4) MTB ("manipulating-the-Byzantine") [39]. The attacker
computes a benign reference aggregate using some benign
data samples obtained from corrupted clients, then computes a
malicious perturbation vector, and an optimized scaling factor
to get the malicious update with the goal of evading detection
by robust aggregation algorithms. The optimization of the
scaling factor can be tailored or agnostic to the aggregator.
Considering our scheme and the baselines do not detect malicious clients, we use the agnostic setting (including min-max
and min-sum) for simplicity because tailoring MTB attack to
all defense aggregators is nontrivial. In our experiments, we
implement the min-max attack since it has a larger impact on
the global model.
Byzantine Defenses with DP. We compare the performance of our approaches with the following five competitors
against Byzantine attacks. All of them satisfy record-level
DP via record-level clipping and DP noise added to the local
gradient/momentum. Note that privacy budget ε in Theorem 1
is the same for different clients because clients have the same
size of local datasets |Di | and same record-level sampling rate
(i.e., same |Di | and pi for different clients Ci ).
1) DP-FedSGD. Note that the original DP-FedSGD in [31]
clips the client gradient to achieve client-level DP. For a fair
comparison, we also implement record-level gradient clipping
on top of the original DP-FedSGD to guarantee record-level
DP. Though DP-FedSGD is not designed for robustness, its
client-level clipping can restrict malicious clients’ capability,
thus providing some level of Byzantine robustness. We take
this as a baseline to illustrate that client-level clipping can
provide some level of robustness, but may not be enough
to defend against strong attackers (either advanced attack
strategy or a larger number of malicious clients).
2) DP-CM. As a baseline that adds DP to median-based
robust aggregators (discussed in Section 3.2), we implement
the Byzantine-robust aggregator Coordinate-wise Median
(CM) [48] with DP noise added to the median result. Note
that only DP-CM uses median-based aggregation, while other
methods use average-based aggregation. As discussed in Section 3.1 and Example 1, the median-based aggregation has
large sensitivity and poor privacy-utility tradeoff.
3) DDP-RP [44]. By leveraging encryption techniques,
DDP-RP guarantees Distributed DP with secure aggregation.
It allows clients to add smaller noise in the local gradient
than the Local DP, with the knowledge of the lower bound of
trusted clients, thus providing enhanced privacy-utility tradeoff than local DP protocols. To guarantee Byzantine robust-

4 https://github.com/pytorch/opacus
5 https://www.tensorflow.org/tutorials/images/cnn
6 https://www.tensorflow.org/federated/api_docs/python/

tff/simulation/datasets/emnist/load_data

18

F

ness, DDP-RP uses range-proof (RP) technologies to securely
verify whether the local model/gradient weights are in a (predefined) bounded range.
4) DP-RSA [51]. It replaces the value aggregation to sign
aggregation, which provides robustness because each client
has limited impact on the aggregation. The DP noise is added
to the local gradient before the sign operation.
5) DP-LFH. The baseline (Section 3.2) directly combines
DP-SGD based momentum with LFH. Each client adds DP
noise to the local gradient, and then computes the local momentum to be aggregated with centered clipping by the server.

E

Proof of Theorem 2 (Aggregation Error)

Before proving Theorem 2, we first show some notations
and assumptions. In t-th iteration, denote the selected honest
clients Ht = H ∪ It and selected Byzantine clients Bt = B ∪
It . For momentum updates in t-th iteration, we simplify the
following notation (ignoring the subscript t) for convenience,
y 0 := m̃t−1 ,

y i := y 0 + z i

with z i := ClipC (m̄t,i − y 0 )

where m̄t,i is the client momentum computed from gradient
with record-level clipping. Then, we can rewrite the noisy
y +ξ
∑
global momentum as m̃t = i∈I|tIt |i , where ξ ∼ N (0, R2 σ2 ).
mt,i }i∈H are i.i.d. with expectation µ :=
We assume {m
m
E[mt,i ] and variance is bounded (in terms of L2-norm)
mt,i − µ∥2 ⩽ ρ2 . Therefore, the record-level gradient
E∥m
clipped ones {m̄t,i }i∈H are also i.i.d., and we denote the expectation µ̄ := E[m̄t,i ]. Due to the clipping operation, the variance
is reduced, and we assume E∥m̄t,i − µ̄ ∥2 ⩽ [ρR/(R + c)]2 ,
where R is the record-level clipping bound and c is some
positive constant. Also, there is a gap between µ and µ̄ and
we assume ∥µ̄ − µ ∥2 ⩽ (κ/R)2 . We assume y 0 is not very far
away from both µ and µ̄ : ∥y 0 − µ̄ ∥2 ⩽ φ2 and ∥y 0 − µ ∥2 ⩽ τ2 .

Parameters in Experiments

Basic Parameters.
• Total number of iterations T : 1000 for MNIST and FEMNIST; 2000 for CIFAR-10.
• Learning rate ηt : For MNIST and FEMNIST datasets, ηt
is linearly reduced from 0.1 to 0.01 w.r.t. iterations. For
CIFAR-10 dataset, ηt is linearly reduced from 0.05 to
0.0025 w.r.t. iterations.
DP-related Parameters.
• Record-level sampling rate pi : 0.05 for all i on MNIST and
CIFAR-10; 0.1 for all i on FEMNIST (because each client
has fewer data records).

Proof. Our proof heavily relies on several useful lemmas
shown in Appendix G, where Lemma 3 splits the L2-norm of
summation of vectors into weighted summation of vectors’L2norm, and Lemma 4 provides the optimal strategy to choose
these weights.
We first consider the bound of E∥m̃t − µ ∥2 . Recall that the
selected client set is It = Ht ∪ Bt , where the honest clients set
Ht and Byzantine clients set Bt are disjoint. For any positive
values γ1 , γ2 , γ3 > 0 with γ1 + γ2 + γ3 = 1, we have

• Client-level sampling rate q: the default value is 1. We
evaluate the influence of q (from 0.2 to 1) on the accuracy
in Table 5.
• Record-level clipping bound R: linearly reduced from R0 to
0.3R0 w.r.t. iterations. Note that in Figure 5, the different
value of R in x-axis is the value of the above R0 . For MNIST
and FEMNIST, we set R0 = 10 by default. For CIFAR-10,
we set R0 = 20 by default, but R0 = 15 only for the case of
ε = 2 in Figure 4.

|It |2 · E∥m̃t − µ ∥2 = |It |2 · E

• Privacy parameter δ in DP: 10−6


2
∑i∈It y i + ξ
−µ
|It |

(a)

= E ∑i∈H (y i − µ ) + ∑ j∈B (y j − µ ) + ξ
t

• Noise multiplier σ: For MNIST (with T = 1000 and
each client has |D |i = 60000/100 = 600 examples),
σ ∈ {0.15, 0.06, 0.029, 0} for ε ∈ {1, 3, 8, inf}. For CIFAR10 (with T = 2000 and each client has |D |i = 50000/100 =
examples), σ ∈ {0.14, 0.077, 0.042, 0}
for
500
ε ∈ {2, 4, 9, inf}. For FEMNIST (with T = 1000 and each
client has around 300 examples), σ ∈ {0.16, 0.09, 0.047, 0}
for ε ∈ {2, 4, 9, inf}.

2

t

(b) 1

⩽

2
2
1
1
E ∑i∈H (y i − µ ) + E ∑ j∈B (y j − µ ) + E∥ξ ∥2
t
t
γ1 |
γ
γ
2
{z
}
|
{z
} 3 | {z }

T1

T2

T3

where (a) used the fact that It = Ht ∪ Bt and Ht ∩ Bt = /0; (b)
used the result in Lemma 3. From the above inequality, the
error can be decomposed into three terms: T1 corresponds to
the error of honest clients (who follow the protocol honestly)
due to the randomness of clients’ training data and bias introduced by clipping, T2 corresponds to the error of Byzantine
clients (who submit arbitrary m̄t,i but will be clipped by the
server), and T3 corresponds to the error introduced by added
Gaussian noise for privacy purpose. We will analyze each of
the three errors in turn.
Bounding T1 . Since E∥X∥2 = ∥E[X]∥2 + E∥X − E[X]∥2

Robustness-related Parameters.
• Client-level clipping bound C (only for DP-BREM and DPLFH): linearly reduced from C0 to 0.3C0 w.r.t. iterations,
where C0 = 1 for MNIST, C0 = 5 for CIFAR-10, and C0 = 2
for FEMNIST.
• Momentum parameter β = 0.9 for all three datasets.
19

for any random vector X, we can rewrite T1 as
2

T1 = ∑i∈Ht (E[y i ] − µ ) + E ∑i∈Ht (y i − E[y i ])
{z

|

} |

T11

{z

where (a) used the assumption that {m̄t,i }i∈Ht are independent, then the random variables {y i }i∈Ht are also independent;
(b) used contractivity of a clipping (projection) step. Thus,

2

}

T12

2
κ
ψ2
+ |Ht |ψ2
+
C
R+c

2
q
4|Ht |2 ψ4
2|Ht |ψ2
2
⩽
+
|
H
|ψ
⩽
|
H
|ψ
+
t
t
C
C2

T1 = T11 + T12 ⩽ |Ht |2

where T11 corresponds to the bias introduced by the clipping operations, and T12 is the variance of honest clients’
submissions. Rewrite z i = αi · (m̄t,i − y 0 ), where αi =
min{1, ∥m̄t,iC−y ∥ } ∈ (0, 1]. Let 1i be an indicator variable de0
noting if the momentum difference m̄t,i − y 0 was clipped.
Therefore, if ∥m̄t,i − y 0 ∥ ⩽ C, then 1i = 0 and αi = 1; if
∥m̄t,i − y 0 ∥ > C, then 1i = 1 and 0 < αi < 1. Then, for each
i ∈ Ht , we have

where ψ := ρR/(R + c) + φ, and the second inequality holds
2
with the assumption C ⩽ ψ2 R/κ (thus we have ψC ⩾ Rκ )
Bounding T2 . For any Byzantine client C j with j ∈ Bt , the
error is bounded by the clipping step

E∥z i − (m̄t,i − y 0 )∥ = E[(1 − αi ) · ∥m̄t,i − y 0 ∥]
⩽ E[1i · ∥m̄t,i − y 0 ∥] ⩽

E[1i · ∥m̄t,i − y 0 ∥2 ]
C

⩽

(a) E∥z ∥2
j

E∥yy j − µ∥2 = E∥zz j + (yy0 − µ)∥2 ⩽

E∥m̄t,i − y 0 ∥2

(b) C2

C

⩽

where

⩽

γ

+

γ

+

τ2
1−γ

γ

+

E∥y 0 − µ ∥2
1−γ

(c)

= (C + τ)2

where (a) is obtained by using in Lemma 3 for any γ ∈ (0, 1);
(b) is obtained by the definition of z j and the assumption; (c)
C
is obtained by taking γ = C+τ
. Then, by using Lemma 3, we
have

E∥m̄t,i − y 0 ∥2 = E∥(m̄t,i − µ̄ ) + (µ̄ − y 0 )∥2
(a) E∥m̄ − µ̄ ∥2
t,i



E∥µ̄ − y 0 ∥2
[ρR/(R + c)]2
φ2
⩽
+
1−γ
γ
1−γ

(b)

= [ρR/(R + c) + φ]2

T2 ⩽ |Bt | · ∑ E∥y j − µ ∥2 ⩽ |Bt |2 (C + τ)2
j∈Bt

where (a) is obtained by using Lemma 3 for any γ ∈ (0, 1);
ρR/(R+c)
(b) is obtained by taking γ = ρR/(R+c)+φ
. Therefore,

Bounding T3 . Since the random noise ξ ∼ N (0, R2 σ2 Id ) ∈
2 2
3 = dR σ .
Putting It All Together. Combining all terms, we have

Rd , we have T

(a)

∥E[y i ] − µ ∥2 = ∥E[y 0 + z i − m̄t,i ] + (µ̄ − µ )∥2
(b) ∥E[z − (m̄ − y )]∥2
i
t,i
0

⩽

(c)

⩽

+

γ

∥µ̄ − µ ∥2
1−γ

E∥m̃t − µ ∥2
" 
#
2
q
1 2|Ht |ψ2
|Bt |2 (C + τ)2 dR2 σ2
1
+ |Ht |ψ +
⩽
+
C
γ2
γ3
|It |2 γ1


2
q
2
√
2|Ht |ψ
(a) 1
=
+ |Ht |ψ + |Bt |(C + τ) + dRσ
C
|It |2
2

q
(b) 1
√
2κ|Ht |(ρ + φ)2
⩽
+
(|
B
|
+
dσ)R
+
|
H
|(ρ
+
φ)
+
|
B
|τ
t
t
t
|It |2
φ2 · R

2
q
q
√
2(ρ + φ)
(c) 1
=
2κ|
H
|(|
B
|
+
dσ)
+
|
H
|(ρ
+
φ)
+
|
B
|τ
t
t
t
t
φ
|It |2
2

p
√
 2(ρ + φ) q
|Ht |(ρ + φ) |Bt |τ 

=
2κ|Ht |(|Bt | + dσ) +
+
 |It |φ
|It |
|It | 
|
{z
}

2
E∥z i − (m̄t,i − y 0 )∥
∥µ̄ − µ ∥2
+
γ
1−γ

(κ/R)2
1−γ

2
2
(e) [ρR/(R + c) + φ]
=
+ κ/R
C

(d) [ρR/(R + c) + φ]4

⩽

γC2

+

where (a) is obtained from the definitions y i = y 0 + z i and
E[m̄t,i ] = µ̄ ; (b) is obtained by using Lemma 3 for any γ ∈
(0, 1); (c) is derived from Jensen’s Inequality, i.e., E[ f (X)] ⩾
f (E[X]) for convex function f (X) := ∥X∥; (d) is obtained by
plugging in the previous two inequalities; (e) is obtained by
2

[ρR/(R+c)+φ]
taking γ = [ρR/(R+c)+φ]
2 +Cκ/R . Now, we can bound T11 by:

T11 ⩽ |Ht | ∑ ∥E[y i ] − µ ∥2 ⩽ |Ht |2
i∈Ht



[ρR/(R + c) + φ]2 κ
+
C
R

=:Φ

(21)
√
Φk √
where (a) is obtained by taking γk = √Φ +√Φ
1
2 + Φ3


p
2
2|Ht |ψ2
for k = 1, 2, 3, where Φ1 :=
+ |Ht |ψ , Φ2 :=
C
2
2
2
2
|Bt | (C + τ) , Φ3 := dR σ ; (b) is obtained by consider-

2

where the first inequality is obtained by using Lemma 3. On
the other hand, we can bound T12 by
(a)

2

(b)

T12 = E ∑i∈Ht ∥y i − E[y i ]∥ ⩽ E ∑i∈Ht ∥m̄t,i − E[m̄t,i ]∥

ing ψ = ρR/(R + c) + φ ⩽ (ρ + φ) and taking the clipping
2
bound C = φκ R, which makes the previous assumption C ⩽
r
2κ|H
√t | ,
ψ2 R/κ holds; (c) is obtained by taking R = ρ+φ
φ
|B |+ dσ

2

⩽ |Ht | · [ρR/(R + c) + φ]2

t

20

√
where c1 , · · · , cK > 0. Then, we have f ∗ = (∑Kj=1 c j )2 ,

where |Ht | ≈ |H |q and |Bt | ≈ |B |q. Since |H | + |B | = n
and q
|B |/n < 1/2, we can approximate the tuning by R ∝
√
O(ρ n/(|Bt | + dσ/q).
The Final Result. On the other hand, we have

√

where the optimal solution is xk =

1

=

|H |2

2

E ∑i∈H mt,i − µ

⩽

ρ2
|H |

(22)

where the first equality is obtained by the definition of mt∗ ; the
second equality is obtained by the fact that all honest clients’
momentum {mt,i }i∈H are independent with each other; and
the third equality is obtained by the assumption ∥mt,i − µ ∥2 ⩽
ρ2 for i ∈ H . Finally, we have



√ 2
then we have f ∗ = ∑Kj=1 c j , which finished the proof.

H Proof of Lemma 2 (Aggregation Sensitivity)

E∥m̃t − mt∗ ∥2
(a) E∥m̃ − µ ∥2
t

= E∥(m̃t − µ ) + (µ − mt∗ )∥2 ⩽
ρ2 /|H | (c)
+
=
⩽
γ
1−γ

(b) Φ2

+

γ

ρ
Φ+ p
|H |

E∥µ − mt∗ ∥2
1−γ

Proof. For the local momentum computation in (11), we can
rewrite it as

!2

mt,i = (1 − β)(ḡt,i + βḡt−1,i + · · · + βt−2 ḡ 2,i ) + βt−1 ḡ 1,i

(23)

For a neighboring dataset Di′ which differs only one record
from client Ci ’s data, i.e., |Di − Di′ | = 1, we denote the corresponding local gradient (with per-record gradient clipping)
′ and m′ , respectively. Since ḡ
and momentum as ḡt,i
τ,i is
t,i
computed by (10) for τ = 1, · · · ,t, we have

where (a) is obtained by using Lemma 3 for any γ ∈ (0, 1);
(b) is obtained from (21) and (22), where Φ is defined in
(21); (c) is obtained by taking γ = Φ+ Φ√ρ . Furthermore, if
|H |

we assume φ ⩽ O(ρ) and τ ⩽ O(ρ), we can rewrite (23) as
the following version
!
√
ρ2 (|B | + dσ/q)
∗ 2
E∥m̃t − mt ∥ ⩽ O
n

∥ḡ τ,i − ḡ ′τ,i ∥ =

′
′
′
∥mt,i − mt,i
∥ ⩽ (1 − β)[∥ḡt,i − ḡt,i
∥ + β∥ḡt−1,i − ḡt−1,i
∥+

· · · + βt−2 ∥ḡ 2,i − ḡ ′2,i ∥] + βt−1 ∥ḡ 1,i − ḡ ′1,i ∥
R
⩽ [(1 − β)(1 + β + · · · + βt−2 ) + βt−1 ] ·
pi |Di |


1 − βt−1
R
R
= (1 − β) ·
+ βt−1 ·
=
1−β
pi |Di |
pi |Di |

Useful Lemmas

Lemma 3. For any positive real values α1 , · · · , αK ∈ R+ and
d
any d-dimensional vectors x1 , · · · , x
L2-norm ∥ · ∥,
K ∈ R with 

2
2
K
K
K ∥x k ∥
we have ∑k=1 x k ⩽ ∑k=1 αk · ∑k=1 α
.
k

Proof. Denote xki as the i-th element of the vector x k , then
2

K

∑k=1 x k
"

d

= ∑i=1
√



K

∑k=1 xki


2

d

= ∑i=1
 #



K

√

x

∑k=1 αk · √αki k

2

K

K

∑k=1 ( αk )2 · ∑k=1

where the inequality is caused by Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.

x1 ,··· ,xK

K

∑k=1 ck /xk ,

s.t.

xk > 0,

= ∥ ∑ j∈I ClipC (mt, j − m̃t−1 ) − ∑ j∈I ClipC (mt,′ j − m̃t−1 )∥
t

t

(a)

′
= ∥ClipC (mt,i − m̃t−1 ) − ClipC (mt,i
− m̃t−1 )∥

(b)

′
⩽ min{2C, ∥mt,i − mt,i
∥} = min{2C,

R
}
pi |Di |

where (a) is obtained due to mt, j = mt,′ j for j ̸= i; and (b) is
obtained according to Lemma 5. Now we finished the main
proof of Lemma 2.

Lemma 4. Consider the following optimization problem
f ∗ = min

where the first inequality is obtained by generalizing the triangle inequality; Therefore,
∥Qt (D ) − Qt (D ′ )∥

2

xki
√
αk

 


 
2
1
K
K
d
K
K ∥x k ∥
2
= ∑k=1 αk · ∑k=1
x
=
α
·
∑k=1 k ∑k=1 αk
αk ∑i=1 ki
d

⩽ ∑i=1

1
R
∥ClipR (∇θ ℓ(x , θ τ−1 ))∥ ⩽
pi |Di |
pi |Di |

where x = Di − Di′ . Then,

which finishes the proof of Theorem 2.

G

(∀k = 1, · · · , K).

Proof. The augmented Lagrange function is L (xk ; λ) =
c
∑Kk=1 xkk + λ · (∑Kk=1 xk − 1). By taking Karush-Kuhn-Tucker
(KKT) conditions, we have
q
(
( c
(
ck
k
∂L
−
+
λ
=
0
=
0
x
=
2
k
xk
∂xk
λ
⇒
⇒
√
∂L
K
K √
=
0
x
=
1
λ
=
∑
∑
∂λ
k=1 k
j=1 c j

2
1
E ∑i∈H (mt,i − µ )
|H |2

E∥µ − mt∗ ∥2 =

ck
√
∑Kj=1 c j

K

∑k=1 xk = 1

The above proof used the following lemma.
21

C
∥x+δ∥ < 1 and

Table 6: Notations
Symbols
θt

Di
Di,t
gt,i , mt,i
mt
ḡt,i , m̄t,i
m̃t
pi
q
R
C

H
B
δB

Description
(global) model in t-th iteration, where θt ∈ Rd
local training data of client Ci
data batch sampled from Di in t-th iteration
client gradient and momentum at t-th iteration
aggregation of mt,i among multiple clients
client gradient and momentum with record-level clipping
aggregation of m̄t,i with DP noise
record-level sampling rate (implemented by client Ci )
client-level sampling rate (implemented by the server)
record-level clipping bound (for DP)
client-level clipping bound (for robustness)
the set of honest clients that follow the protocol honestly
the set of Byzantine clients that are malicious
the percentage of Byzantine clients, i.e., δB = |B |/n × 100%

∥ClipC (x) − ClipC (x + δ)∥2


2
2
C
C
· (x + δ) =
· (x + δ) − δ
1−
∥x + δ∥
∥x + δ∥


2

C
C
∥x + δ∥2 − 2 1 −
= 1−
(x + δ)⊤ δ + ∥δ∥2
∥x + δ∥
∥x + δ∥

 


C
C
2
⊤
2
= 1−
1−
∥x + δ∥ − 2(x + δ) δ + ∥δ∥
∥x + δ∥
∥x + δ∥

= x−

+

C · ∥δ∥2
∥x + δ∥


= 1−

h
i C · ∥δ∥2
C
∥(x + δ) − δ∥2 −C∥x + δ∥ +
∥x + δ∥
∥x + δ∥

< 0 + 1 · ∥δ∥2 = ∥δ∥2

Lemma 5. For any vectors x and δ, we have

where ∥(x + δ) − δ∥2 = ∥x∥2 ⩽ C2 < C∥x + δ∥. Therefore,
∥ClipC (x) − ClipC (x + δ)∥ < ∥δ∥ in this case.
Case 4. Assume ∥x∥ > C and ∥x + δ∥ > C. Then,

∥ClipC (x) − ClipC (x + δ)∥ ⩽ min{2C, ∥δ∥}

∥ClipC (x) − ClipC (x + δ)∥2

where ClipC (x) := min{1,C/∥x∥} · x and ∥ · ∥ denotes L2norm.

=

Proof. Our proof of Lemma 5 mainly uses the triangle inequality of a norm. Note that for L-2 norm ∥ · ∥, we have∥a +
b∥2 = ∥a∥2 + 2a⊤ b + ∥b∥2 for any vectors a and b. We first
show that ∥ClipC (x) − ClipC (x + δ)∥ ⩽ ∥δ∥, which is proved
by enumerating all cases as follows.

=

Case 1. Assume ∥x∥ ⩽ C and ∥x + δ∥ ⩽ C. Then,

2
C
C
·x−
· (x + δ)
∥x∥
∥x + δ∥

C2
C2 · 2x⊤ (x + δ)
C2
2
·
∥x∥
−
+
· ∥x + δ∥2
∥x∥2
∥x∥ · ∥x + δ∥
∥x + δ∥2

= 2C2 −

C2 · [∥x∥2 + (∥x∥2 + 2x⊤ δ + ∥δ∥2 )]
C2 · ∥δ∥2
+
∥x∥ · ∥x + δ∥
∥x∥ · ∥x + δ∥

= 2C2 −

C2 · [∥x∥2 + ∥x + δ∥2 ]
C2
+
· ∥δ∥2
∥x∥ · ∥x + δ∥
∥x∥ · ∥x + δ∥

< 2C2 −C2 · 2 + 1 · ∥δ∥2 = ∥δ∥2

∥ClipC (x) − ClipC (x + δ)∥ = ∥x − (x + δ)∥ = ∥δ∥

2

2

+∥x+δ∥
2
2
where ∥x∥
∥x∥·∥x+δ∥ ⩾ 2 due to ∥x∥ + ∥x + δ∥ − 2(∥x∥ · ∥x +

C
<
Case 2. Assume ∥x∥ > C and ∥x +δ∥ ⩽ C. Then, 0 < ∥x∥

2

C
< 1 due to ∥x∥ > C
δ∥) = (∥x∥ − ∥x + δ∥)2 ⩾ 0, and ∥x∥·∥x+δ∥
and ∥x + δ∥ > C. Therefore, ∥ClipC (x) − ClipC (x + δ)∥ < ∥δ∥
in this case.
The Final Result. By summarizing all cases above, we
have ∥ClipC (x) − ClipC (x + δ)∥ ⩽ ∥δ∥. On the other hand,
since ∥ClipC (x)∥ ⩽ C for any x, it is obvious that

1 and
∥ClipC (x) − ClipC (x + δ)∥2


2
2
C
C
=
· x − (x + δ) =
1−
·x+δ
∥x∥
∥x∥

2


C
C
2
= 1−
∥x∥ + 2 1 −
x⊤ δ + ∥δ∥2
∥x∥
∥x∥

 


C
C
C · ∥δ∥2
2
⊤
2
1−
∥x∥ + 2x δ + ∥δ∥ +
= 1−
∥x∥
∥x∥
∥x∥


2

C 
C
·
∥δ∥
= 1−
∥x + δ∥2 −C∥x∥ +
∥x∥
∥x∥

∥ClipC (x) − ClipC (x + δ)∥ ⩽ ∥ClipC (x)∥ + ∥ClipC (x + δ)∥ ⩽ 2C

Thus, the upper bound of ∥ClipC (x) − ClipC (x + δ)∥ is
min{2C, ∥δ∥}.

I

Gaussian Differential Privacy (GDP)

Privacy Accountant. Since deep learning needs to iterate
over the training data and apply gradient computation multiple times during the training process, each access to the
training data incurs some privacy cost from the overall privacy budget ε. The total privacy cost of repeated applications
of additive noise mechanisms follow from the composition

< 0 + 1 · ∥δ∥2 = ∥δ∥2
where ∥x + δ∥2 ⩽ C2 < C∥x∥. Therefore, ∥ClipC (x) −
ClipC (x + δ)∥ < ∥δ∥ in this case.
Case 3. Assume ∥x∥ ⩽ C and ∥x + δ∥ > C. Then, 0 <
22

theorems and their refinements [14]. The task of keeping track
of the accumulated privacy loss in the course of execution of
a composite mechanism, and enforcing the applicable privacy
policy, can be performed by the privacy accountant. Abadi
et al. [1] proposed moments accountant to provide a tighter
bound on the privacy loss compared to the generic advanced
composition theorem [15]. Another new and more state-ofthe-art privacy accountant method is Gaussian Differential
Privacy (GDP) [7, 12], which was shown to obtain a tighter
result than moments accountant.
Gaussian Differential Privacy. GDP is a new privacy notion which faithfully retains hypothesis testing interpretation
of differential privacy. By leveraging the central limit theorem of Gaussian distribution, GDP has been shown to possess
an analytically tractable privacy accountant (vs. moments
accountant must be done by numerical computation). Furthermore, GDP can be converted to a collection of (ε, δ)-DP
guarantees (refer to Lemma 9). Note that even in terms of
(ε, δ)-DP, the GDP approach gives a tighter privacy accountant than moments accountant. GDP utilizes a single parameter µ ⩾ 0 (called privacy parameter) to quantify the privacy
of a randomized mechanism. Similar to the privacy budget ε
defined in DP, a larger µ in GDP indicates less privacy guarantee. Comparing with (ε, δ)-DP, the new notion µ-GDP can
losslessly reason about common primitives associated with
differential privacy, including composition, privacy amplification by sampling, and group privacy. In the following, we
briefly introduce some important properties (that will be used
in the analysis of our approach) of GDP as below. The formal definition and more detailed results can be found in the
original paper [12].

training dataset, T as the total number of iterations and σ as
the noise scale (i.e., the ratio between the standard deviation
of Gaussian noise and the gradient norm bound). Then, algorithm DP-SDG asymptotically
satisfies µ-GDP with privacy
q
parameter µ = p

In this paper, we use µ-GDP as our primary privacy accountant method due to its good property on composition
and accountant of privacy amplification and then convert the
µ-GDP result to (ε, δ)-DP. We note that other privacy accountant methods, such as moments accountant [1] and Rényi DP
(RDP) [34], are also applicable to the proposed scheme and
theoretical analysis, but might lead to suboptimal results.

J

Preliminaries for Crypto Primitives

Shamir’s Secret Sharing with Robust Reconstruction. Due
to the assumption of a malicious minority, the utilized crypto
primitives should be able to tolerate the wrong or missing
messages of malicious clients. Shamir’s t-out-of-n Secret
Sharing Scheme [38] allows distributing a secret s among n
parties such that: 1) the complete secret can be reconstructed
from any combination of t shares; 2) any set of t − 1 or fewer
shares reveals no information about s, where t is the threshold
of the secret sharing scheme. We denote [s]i as the share held
by the i-th party. Shamir’s secret sharing scheme is linear,
which means a party can locally perform: 1) addition of two
shares, 2) addition of a constant, and 3) multiplication by
a constant. Furthermore, Shamir’s secret sharing scheme is
closely related to Reed-Solomon error correcting codes [28],
which is a group of polynomial-based error correcting codes.
Shamir’s secret sharing scheme results in a [n,t, n − t + 1]
Reed-Solomon code that can tolerate up to q errors and e
erasures (message dropouts) such that 2q + e < n − t + 1.
Given any subset of n − e shares Q (|Q | ⩾ n − e) with up to q
errors, any standard Reed Solomon decoding algorithm, such
as Gao’s decoding algorithm [18], can robustly reconstruct
the secret s. Due to the property of robust reconstruction,
Shamir’s secret sharing is able to guarantee security with
malicious minority (as versus additive secret sharing [11]
guarantees security with honest-but-curious parties).
EIFFeL: An Instantiation of SAVI Protocol. EIFFeL [36]
is a SAVI protocol (with privacy and integrity guarantees)
that securely aggregates only well-informed inputs. Its threat
model assumes a malicious server (for privacy only) and a
set of malicious clients (for both breaching privacy and submitting malformed inputs) that can arbitrarily deviate from
the protocol, while the remaining honest clients are assumed
to follow the protocol correctly and have well-formed inputs. EIFFeL ensures privacy by using Shamir’s secret sharing scheme [38]. Integrity is guaranteed via 1) secret-shared
non-interactive proofs (SNIP) [10], which is an informationtheoretic zero-knowledge proof for secret-shared data; and 2)
verifiable secret shares [17], which validates the correctness

Lemma 6 (Gaussian Mechanism for GDP [12]). Consider
the problem of privately releasing a univariate statistic
f (D) of a dataset D. Define the sensitivity of f (·) as s f =
supD,D′ | f (D) − f (D′ )|, where the supremum is over all neighboring datasets. Then, the Gaussian mechanism M (D) =
f (D) + ξ, where ξ ∼ N (0, s2f /µ2 ), satisfies µ-GDP.
Lemma 7 (Composition Theorem of GDP
q [12]). The m-fold
composition of µi -GDP mechanisms is

2

T (e1/σ − 1).

µ21 + · · · + µ2m -GDP.

Lemma 8 (Group Privacy of GDP [12]). If a mechanism is
µ-GDP, then it is Kµ-GDP for a group with size K.
Lemma 9 (µ-GDP to (ε, δ)-DP [12]). A mechanism is µ-GDP
if and only if it is (ε, δ(ε))-DP for all ε ⩾ 0, where




ε µ
ε µ
ε
δ(ε) = Φ − +
−e ·Φ − −
,
µ 2
µ 2
and Φ denotes the CDF of standard normal (Gaussian) distribution.
Lemma 10 (Privacy Central Limit Theorem of GDP [7]).
Denote p as the sampling probability of one example in the
23

of the secret shares. Note that the original SNIP utilizes additive secret sharing scheme [11], and its deployment setting
uses ⩾ 2 honest and non-colluding servers as the verifiers. In
contrast, by leveraging Shamir’s secret sharing with robust
reconstruction, EIFFeL extends SNIP to a malicious threat
model in a single server setting, where all the other clients
(some of them are malicious) and the server jointly act as the
verifiers for the verification of client Ci ’s input. Therefore,
EIFFeL is compatible to our system model (a single server)
and the threat model discussed in Section 3.1.

K

2) anything that can be learned from the noisy aggregation
of well-formed inputs (thus achieving the same DP guarantee
as the original DP-BREM).
We prove this privacy property using the following lemmas,
where Lemma 14 and Lemma 16 are derived from EIFFeL
[36].
Lemma 14. In Phase 1, for an honest client Ci , DP-BREM+
reveals nothing about the private input z i except Valid(z i ) = 1.
Lemma 15. In Phase 2, DP-BREM+ reveals nothing about
the generated Gaussian noise.

Proof of Theorem 4 (Security Analysis)

Proof. In step 4
⃝, no entity learns the uniformly random number u as long as there is at least one honest client due to the
bitwise XOR operation. In step 5
⃝, nothing is revealed because the utilized MPC protocol [29] guarantees information
theoretic privacy about the input shares during computation
5 only genfor distribution transmission. Note that the step ⃝
erates the shares hold by clients without outputting the final
result.

Integrity. We prove that DP-BREM+ satisfies the integrity
constraint using the following lemmas, where Lemma 11 and
Lemma 13 are derived from EIFFeL [36].
Lemma 11 (Integrity of Input). DP-BREM+ rejects all malformed inputs with probability 1 − negl(κ).
Lemma 12 (Integrity of Gaussian Noise). In Phase 2 of DPBREM+ , each client holds the share of random vector ξ that
follows the Gaussian distribution N (0, R2 σ2 Id ).

Lemma 16. In Phase 3, for an honest client Ci , DP-BREM+
reveals nothing about the private input z i except whatever
can be leaned from the noisy aggregate.

Proof. In the step 4
⃝ of Phase 2, the jointly generated random number u follows uniform distribution in range [0, 1] as
long as there is at least one honest client because u’s binary
representation b is the result of bitwise XOR of clients’ local
⃝, since the utilized MPC prorandom vectors {b i }∀i . In step 5
tocol [24, 29] guarantees computation integrity (meaning that
the output is correctly computed) with malicious minority,
4 will be correctly
the uniform distribution generated in step ⃝
transformed to Gaussian distribution.

L

Iteration Curve. Figure 6 shows how the accuracy changes
with the training iterations across three datasets. The CIFAR10 dataset, being more complex, has a larger total training
iterations (T = 2000), while the other two datasets have T =
1000. The presence of Byzantine attacks results in less smooth
iteration curves compared to the attack-free case.

Since clients locally add shares of valid inputs and noise
together, DP-BREM+ satisfies integrity of aggregate shown in
Lemma 13. Our integrity guarantee in Lemma 13 directly follows EIFFeL [36], though the integrity of noise has different
definition compared with the integrity of input. Note that the
integrity of EIFFeL (and ours) relies on robust reconstruction
property of Shamir’s secret sharing [38], and the details can
be found from the paper [36].

M

Other Related Work

FL with DP. Differential Privacy (DP) was originally designed for the centralized scenario where a trusted database
server, which has direct access to all client’s data in the clear,
wishes to answer queries or publish statistics in a privacypreserving manner by randomizing query results. In FL,
McMahan et al. [31] proposed DP-FedSGD and DP-FedAvg,
which provide client-level privacy with a trusted server. Geyer
et al. [19] uses an algorithm similar to DP-FedSGD for the
architecture search problem, and the privacy guarantee acts
on client-level and the trusted server too. Li et al. [27] studies
online transfer learning and introduces a notion called task
global privacy that works on record-level. However, the online setting assumes the client only interacts with the server
once and does not extend to the federated setting. Zheng et
al. [50] introduced two privacy notions, that describe privacy
guarantee against an individual malicious client and against
a group of malicious clients (but not against the server) on
record-level privacy, based on a new privacy notion called

Lemma 13 (Integrity of Aggregate). The aggregated output
of DP-BREM+ must contain the inputs of all honest clients
and the generated Gaussian noise.
Aggregate = ∑i∈I z i + ∑i∈I ∗ z i + ξ
H

More Experimental Results

M

where random vector ξ ∼ N (0, R2 σ2 Id ), IH is the set of all
honest clients, IM∗ is the set of malicious clients with wellformed inputs (i.e., IM∗ = IValid \IH )
Privacy. DP-BREM+ guarantees: nothing can be learned
about a private input zi for an honest client Ci , except:
1) zi passes the integrity check, i.e., Valid(zzi ) = 1 .
24

DP-BREM/

DP-FedSGD

DP-CM

FEMNIST ( = 4, B = 15%) CIFAR-10 ( = 4, B = 10%)
Accuracy
Accuracy

MNIST ( = 3, B = 30%)
Accuracy

Attack=ALIE

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
DP-FedSGD
0.0 DP-BREM/
0 250Attack=ALIE
500 750 1000
0.6
Iteration t
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
DP-FedSGD
0.0 DP-BREM/
0 500Attack=ALIE
1000 1500 2000
0.8
Iteration t

DDP-RP

DP-RSA

Attack=IPM

DP-LFH

Attack=LF

Attack=MTB

DP-CM
DDP-RP
250Attack=IPM
500 750 1000

DP-RSA
DP-LFH
0 250Attack=LF
500 750 1000

0

250Attack=MTB
500 750 1000

DP-CM
DDP-RP
0 500Attack=IPM
1000 1500 2000

DP-LFH
0 500Attack=LF
1000 1500 2000

0

500 1000
1500 2000
Attack=MTB

0

0

0

250

0

Iteration t

Iteration t

Iteration t

Iteration t

Iteration t

Iteration t

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

0

250

500

Iteration t

750 1000

250

500

Iteration t

750 1000

250

500

Iteration t

750 1000

500

Iteration t

750 1000

Figure 6: Iteration Curve for three datasets.
f -differential privacy. Note that, our solutions achieve recordlevel DP under either a trusted server or a malicious server.
Byzantine-Robust FL. Recently, there have been extensive works on Byzantine-robust federated/distributed learning
with a trustworthy server, and most of them play with median statistics of gradient contributions. Blanchard et al. [5]
proposed Krum which uses the Euclidean distance to determine which gradient contributions should be removed. Yin
et al. [48] proposed two robust distributed gradient descent
algorithms, one based on the coordinate-wise median, and
the other on the coordinate-wise trimmed mean. Mhamdi et
al. [33] proposed a meta-aggregation rule called Bulyan, a
two-step meta-aggregation algorithm based on the Krum and
trimmed median, which filters malicious updates followed by
computing the trimmed median of the remaining updates.
Private (non-DP) and Byzantine-Robust FL. Recently,
some works tried to simultaneously achieve both privacy and
robustness of FL. He et al. [21] proposed a Byzantine-resilient
and privacy-preserving solution, which makes distance-based
robust aggregation rules (such as Krum [5]) compatible with
secure aggregation via MPC and secret sharing. So et al. [41]
developed a similar scheme based on Krum, but rely on different cryptographic techniques, such as verifiable Shamir’s
secret sharing and Reed-Solomon code. Velicheti et al. [43]

achieved both privacy and Byzantine robustness via incorporating secure averaging among randomly clustered clients
before filtering malicious updates through robust aggregation. However, these works only ensure the security of the
aggregation step and do not achieve DP for the aggregated
model.

25

