JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

1

SPFL: A Self-purified Federated Learning Method
Against Poisoning Attacks

arXiv:2309.10607v1 [cs.CR] 19 Sep 2023

Zizhen Liu, Weiyang He, Chip-Hong Chang, Fellow, IEEE, Jing Ye, Huawei Li, Senior Member, IEEE,
Xiaowei Li, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—While Federated learning (FL) is attractive for
pulling privacy-preserving distributed training data, the credibility
of participating clients and non-inspectable data pose new security
threats, of which poisoning attacks are particularly rampant and
hard to defend without compromising privacy, performance or
other desirable properties of FL. To tackle this problem, we
propose a self-purified FL (SPFL) method that enables benign
clients to exploit trusted historical features of locally purified model
to supervise the training of aggregated model in each iteration. The
purification is performed by an attention-guided self-knowledge
distillation where the teacher and student models are optimized
locally for task loss, distillation loss and attention-based loss
simultaneously. SPFL imposes no restriction on the communication
protocol and aggregator at the server. It can work in tandem
with any existing secure aggregation algorithms and protocols
for augmented security and privacy guarantee. We experimentally
demonstrate that SPFL outperforms state-of-the-art FL defenses
against various poisoning attacks. The attack success rate of SPFL
trained model is at most 3% above that of a clean model, even if
the poisoning attack is launched in every iteration with all but one
malicious clients in the system. Meantime, it improves the model
quality on normal inputs compared to FedAvg, either under attack
or in the absence of an attack.
Index Terms—Federated Learning, Poisoning attack, Knowledge distillation, Attention maps, Deep Neural Network

I. I NTRODUCTION
EDERATED LEARNING (FL) is an emerging distributed
learning paradigm for multiple participants (also known
as clients) to collaboratively train a model using their own
data. The workflow is typically orchestrated by a central server
which collects only updates to locally trained model but not the
raw training data that is stored locally and never exchanged
or transferred. These updates are aggregated by the server
to improve the global model performance and the updated
model data is passed to the participating clients in exchange
for new updates in the next iteration of training [1]. The
aggregation is usually computed in a secure manner such that
each client, including the server, can learn nothing more than the
aggregation result to avoid indirect privacy leakage of sensitive
information for inference attacks [2], [3].
Beyond attacks targeting data inference, FL also opens the
door to a fleet of malicious alterations of the training pipeline

F

Manuscript received December 31, 2022. This research is supported in part by
the Ministry of Education, Singapore, under its AcRF Tier 2 Award No MOET2EP20121-0001, and in part by the National Key Research and Development
Program of China under grant No.2020YFB1600201, the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under grant No. (U20A20202, 62090024,
61876173), and the Youth Innovation Promotion Association CAS.
W. He and C. H. Chang are with the School of Electrical and Electronic
Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798. Z. Liu, Y.
Jing, H. Li and X. Li are with the State Key Lab of Processors, Institute of
Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, and the University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, and CASTEST Co., Ltd., Beijing, China 100190.
Corresponding author: C. H. Chang. (Emails: echchang@ntu.edu.sg)

made feasible by distributed learning over uninspectable private datasets and privacy-preserving multi-party computation
involving potentially unreliable devices. New attack surfaces
may be introduced into FL system by using training pipeline
as an intermediary for inference time attacks. Since individual
benign clients and the server have no control over other clients’
behaviors, a malicious client may deviate from the prescribed
training protocol to modify the model in an undesirable way to
achieve different objectives. The attacks can be conducted via
inflated model updates by either crafting poisoned data for local
model training (data poisoning) or directly manipulating model
updates to the server (model poisoning) [4]. The attack scope
can be untargeted or targeted. Untargeted attacks downgrade
the model performance globally, whereas targeted poisoning
attacks affect the model’s output on only a small subset of
data points with specified characteristics while preserving its
overall accuracy. This type of integrity threat has gained more
attention recently due to the fact that it is harder to detect,
and can be easily executed – a single-shot attack may suffice
to create a backdoor into the centrally learned model. Some
nuanced attacks may exhibit a continuum between these two
outcomes. Byzantine threat model assumes that one or more
adversaries can directly control certain number of clients to alter
their outputs and bias the learned model to produce arbitrary
outputs towards the adversarial objective. Unlike centralized
learning, adversaries in FL setting have access to a pool of
Byzantine devices and can inspect the model parameters to
coordinate their poisoned updates in real time (within-update
collusion) or adapt their attack across updates (cross-update
collusion) as the training progresses.
It is challenging to guarantee the security of FL against
poisoning attacks. For one thing, the training data cannot be
inspected by anyone due to data minimization. This makes
existing defenses against backdoor attacks that require full
control of training process, or access to training data or holdout
set inapplicable in the FL setting. For another thing, if defense
strategies have to access or compute on plain local gradients
in defending against poisoning attacks, then local gradients are
inevitably leaked, which is not permitted for privacy concern.
Furthermore, adversaries are allowed to collude and control
more clients at different time, which dramatically increases
the effectiveness and stealth of poisoning attacks. Cross-update
collusion makes both targeted and untargeted attacks more
difficult to be detected and defended against as each Byzantine
client is free to participate in or exit from any round of update.
Moreover, defenses against model update and data poisoning
attacks must assume white box adversaries in FL setting, which
adds challenges to preserve privacy, robustness and model’s
performance simultaneously.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

Existing defense methods based on robust aggregation
rules try to replace averaging with robust estimators such as
geometric median [5], coordinate-wise median [6], α-trimmed
mean, or a variant/combination of such techniques [7], [8].
Although some of these robust aggregation algorithms are
provably effective against data and untargeted model poisoning
attacks under certain assumptions, their theoretical guarantees are often not met on more rigorous empirical evaluation
with different learning problems. most of these Byzantinetolerant aggregation schemes and other server-side mitigation
approaches generally assume that the server is honest. They
operate on visible model updates, which are not compatible
or cannot be easily integrated with multi-party computation
protocols that possess strong user privacy guarantee. A recent
defense based on black-box knowledge transfer [9] reduces information leakage by reducing the dimension of the exchanged
information. It shares predictions instead of model parameters
of individual client models on public data. The assumption
of a large common pool of training data itself violates the
central telnet of distributed learning. Using public training data
to share confidence scores also exposes the local model to
membership inference attack. Without a centralized model, it
becomes harder to pre-empt the hyperparameters for differential
privacy protection without sacrificing the accuracy of benign
client models.
It is daunting if not impractically costly to design a
foolproof FL system with ideal privacy and security properties.
To prevent perfect from being the enemy of good, it is more
important to address security and privacy problems of FL by a
divide-and-conquer approach with modular protection methods.
Each mitigation method can coexist with other countermeasures
to mitigate different threats and can be improved independently
without hurting the security and privacy guarantees of others to
minimize trade off requirement on multiple desirable properties.
With this in mind, we propose a novel self-purified FL (SPFL)
method by using self-distillation to defend against poisoning
attacks with high Byzantine tolerance. SPFL can be performed
by each benign client independently and co-exist with any
secure and privacy-preserving aggregation methods. The local
model of last iteration plays the teacher role, and purifies the
aggregated malicious model via knowledge distillation in each
iteration of FL training. An effective mechanism is proposed to
transfer class-discriminating attention information between the
teacher and the student. Specifically, our major contributions
are:
1) We introduce the first attention guided self-distillation technique into FL to defend against poisoning attacks, which
enables benign clients to fully exploit local training data
and historical model to purify malicious updates regardless
of the number of colluding adversaries.
2) The anomaly is mitigated by optimizing the overall task
loss, distillation loss and attention loss functions. Classdiscriminating attention information in addition to traditional
logit information are exploited for teacher-student collaborative knowledge distillation, making SPFL a powerful active
client-side defense method against poisoning attack for FL.
3) We evaluate SPFL on a suite of federated benchmarks across
multiple target poisoning attacks, and demonstrate that it is
robust against poisoning attacks while improving the model

2

quality concurrently.
4) SPFL makes no assumption about trusted server and public
data. It allows the benign clients to implement the defense without any restriction on or conflict with existing
aggregation algorithms and secure aggregation protocols for
augmented security and privacy risk mitigation.
II. BACKGROUND AND R ELATED W ORK
A. Federated Learning (FL)
FL is a distributed machine learning paradigm for building
a model based on training data of multiple decentralized participants [1]. Instead of pooling raw training data, the global
model is established by collecting focused model updates from
clients who trained the shared model locally using their own
data for privacy preservation. Focused updates are narrowly
scoped to contain minimum information for specific learning
task, and they can be instantiated as model parameters, gradients
or the gaps before and after model training in wide-ranging
algorithms. In horizontal FL, different clients have different
data but the local training datasets share the same feature and
label space. Usually, the training process is orchestrated by a
central server. One of the typical optimization algorithms for
updating the global model is Federated Averaging (FedAvg)
[10]. For each communication round (iteration), each client
applies stochastic gradient descent (SGD) to train the model
with its local data for a number of internal epochs. The clients
then transmit their local model parameters to the central server,
where the global model is updated with the aggregation of the
clients’ local model updates. This process is repeated until the
loss function converges. As the shared model parameters carry
extensive information about the corresponding training data of
the clients [2], secure aggregation protocols are integrated into
FedAvg to prevent indirect leakage of personal information.
Secure aggregation enables multiple clients to jointly aggregate
the model updates but no party can learn anything beyond the
aggregation results [11], [12]. To avoid shared model parameters
from being stealthily extracted and exploited for inference
attacks, individual local model updates are protected by privacypreserving and cryptographic techniques such as homomorphic
encryption [13], [12] or mask hiding [14], [11] before they are
uploaded to the server for aggregation.
B. Poisoning Threats of Federated Learning
Poisoning attack is one of the most notorious threats of FL.
It corrupts a target model at the training process to impede the
model from converging to the optimal performance [15] or control its prediction results [4]. The distributed training attributes
and privacy-preserving aggregation of FL infrastructure bolster
such attacks. Since the model is trained locally before the updated local model parameters are submitted and aggregated by
the server, any participant who has access to the local model can
deviate from the prescribed protocol to conduct a training-time
attack [1]. Furthermore, due to the confidentiality requirements,
all participants are not supposed to know how other clients
generate their updates. The coordination server is constrained
by the opacity of the updates and training process at the
local premises to verify the received data integrity. This gives
a group of malicious participants the opportunity to directly

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

and cooperatively manipulate the training processes or trained
parameters of their local models to stealthily insert a backdoor
into the global model. This way of feeding the aggregator with
rigged updates from one or more local backdoored models is
known as model poisoning [4], [16]. It is more powerful than
data poisoning attacks in centralized learning. Depending on
the adversary’s capability and goal, model poisoning can also
be combined with data poisoning and executed simultaneously
or individually in FL.
According to the goals, poisoning attacks can be broadly
divided into untargeted and targeted. Untargeted attacks compromise the trained model to cause misclassification of clean
inputs. They tend to incur non-trivial degradation in learning
performance or obstruct learning convergence. The attack in
[17] assumed that the local model parameters on compromised
client devices can be manipulated during the learning process to
produce a large testing error rate on the global model. However,
benign participants can observe the apparent adverse global
effect during the training process and take actions to mitigate
this type of attack. In contrast, targeted attacks embed malicious
functionality into the trained model by controlling the model’s
prediction accuracy only under specific circumstances without
disrupting its normal behavior. This type of attack maintains
the model availability by achieving high accuracy on both its
main task and the attacker chosen subtask. Backdoor attack is
the most widely encountered targeted attack in FL, wherein
a backdoor is surreptitiously infiltrated into the joint model
to change the model’s outputs only on inputs with certain
characteristics selected by the attacker.
Bagdasaryan et al. [4] developed a model poisoning attack
(MPA) that allows any participants in FL to replace the joint
model with a backdoored model. It was found in [18] that the
backdoored model can be trained by limiting the update norms
to avoid norm clipping and evade anomaly detection. Byzantine
participants can share the updates evenly and maliciously train
the model with multiple rounds of norm-bounded projected
gradient descents to strengthen the backdoor effect. Unlike
centralized backdoor attacks on FL where each adversarial
participant embeds the same global trigger during training,
distributed backdoor attack (DBA) [16] decomposes a global
trigger pattern into disjoint local patterns and embeds each of
them into the training set of a different adversarial participant.
Baruch et al. [19] showed that directed small changes to
many parameters of a few Byzantine participants is sufficient
to circumventing defenses for FL. Their A Little Is Enough
(LIE) attack searches for the perturbation range in which the
parameters can be changed without being detected even in
the i.i.d. settings. By operating within the population variance,
non-omniscient attack with access to only data of the rogue
participants is feasible. Bhagoji et al. [20] showed that a highly
constrained adversary can still succeed in model poisoning by
an alternating minimization strategy with distance constraints to
avoid the statistical anomaly detection on updated values. This
attack is more stealthy than model replacement [4] as it boosts
only the malicious component of the update.
C. Robust Federated Learning
1) Server-side defenses: Most of the existing defenses are
performed by the trusted federated server. The most widely stud-

3

ied approach is the statistics-based defense leveraging specific
aggregation rules to remove or mitigate the outliers. Averaging
the received gradients is optimal in the absence of Byzantine
clients but brittle even if only one malicious cient is present.
Non-linear aggregation rules like median [6], trimmed-mean,
geometric-mean [7], krum and bulyan [5] have been proposed
to replace the arithmetic mean in the original FedAvg by
computing a reliable vector or choosing one of the values that
represents the centre of the benign distribution. FLTrust [21]
utilizes the root dataset, which is a small clean dataset collected
manually by the server, to bootstrap trust on the server. FLTrust
normalizes local model updates to the same hyper-sphere as the
server model to diminish the effect of adversarial updates. To
strengthen good updates against Byzantine attacks, an adaptive
federated averaging (AFA) algorithm [22] was proposed. It
uses Hidden Markov model to model the ability of each client
and cosine similarity to measure the quality of model updates
during training. The above defenses deter availability attacks
from faulty, noisy and outlier behaviors and block bad clients
based on measurable distance between benign and Byzantine
model parameters, which may not be effective in detecting
backdoor updates. Robust Learning Rate (RLR) method [23]
controls the clients’ participation in each dimension of the
model updates by adjusting the server’s learning rate according
to the sign information of the client’s model updates. The idea
is to move the aggregated model parameters in the direction
towards maximizing the adversarial loss. Foolsgold [8] also
makes use of the similarity between malicious clients’ gradients
to counteract sybil-based label flipping and backdoor poisoning
with boundless number of attackers. Instead of identifying suspicious local gradients over plaintexts, ShieldFL [24] measures
the cosine similarity over encrypted model update using twotrapdoor homomorphic encryption to resist poisoned model
without compromising privacy.
Anomaly detection approaches try to identify anomalous
data in the distribution of local model updates and remove
them from the aggregation [25], [26]. Several methods have
been proposed along this line, for instance, low-dimensional
embedding analysis [25], K-means clustering [27], graph-based
anomaly detection, and feedback-based process [28]. Defense
like [18] clips the L2-norm of the model updates to a fixed
value, effectively limiting the contribution of each individual
update to the aggregated model.
These defenses deter the poisoning attacks to some extent but they are not without caveats. Most methods fail to
prevent the aggregation from being polluted when aggressive
adversaries have control of a large proportion of clients, or the
malicious updates are made as close to other updates as possible
to bypass the detection. Clipping based methods are ineffective
against poisoned model updates with small magnitudes but
high attack impact. Additionally, clipping and detection-based
methods can only be operated on plaintext model updates.
Many of the robust aggregation rules do not work with privacypreserving aggregation, which weakens the privacy assurance of
FL. Privacy-preserving aggregations like RFA [7] and ShieldFL
[24] involving complex cryptographic operations are highly
computationally intensive. Similar to other robust aggregation
rules, they often reject not only poisoned model updates but
also flatten out benign model updates, which cause performance

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

degradation of the federated model.
2) Client-side defenses: Defenses performed at the client’s
side are more reliable as it provides guarantee for each client
individually without assuming the trustworthiness of the server
and other clients. Nevertheless, very few methods tackle poisoning attacks from the client perspective. White Blood Cell
for FL (FL-WBC) [29] is a client-based defense that mitigates
model poisoning effect of polluted global model by perturbing
the parameter space during local training where long-lasting
attack effect on parameters is identified. Inspired by matching
networks, where the class of an input is predicted from the
similarity of its features with a support set of labeled examples,
Chen et al. [30] proposed a new defense mechanism to reduce
the impact of backdoor attacks by removing the decision
logic from the shared model. Adversarial training can also be
leveraged to enhance robustness of FL. Federated adversarial
training (FAT) [31] enables a learning model to pivot on the
sensitive attributes by modifying the optimization objectives and
loss functions to achieve predictions that are independent of the
sensitive attributes embedded in the training data.
To reduce the error bound and poisoning susceptibility
due to the high dimensionality of model parameter updates,
Cronus [9] abandons the shared model completely by sharing
only the logits of locally trained models on public dataset.
As adversaries can eavesdrop the transmitted confidence scores
corresponding to the public data, black-box access itself is inadequate to avert model extraction and inversion attacks [32]. Both
membership privacy mechanism for training the local model
and prediction privacy mechanism for protecting the updates
are necessary but they inevitably trade utility for privacy. This
atypical FL setting raises further question on the assessment
of performance gain - the contribution due to data from other
clients over and above the public dataset is inconsistent among
clients. Without a common model architecture, objective inconsistency is exacerbated by the increase in diversity of updates
across heterogeneous models unknown to the aggregator. This
new FL paradigm introduces more biases and poses a significant
challenge to utility-privacy trade-off optimization.
D. Knowledge Distillation (KD)
KD was first developed to compress a bigger model or
an ensemble of well-trained machine learning models into a
smaller model without significant quality drop [33]. It is also
referred to as a teacher-student paradigm for knowledge transfer
between a knowledgeable model (teacher) and a learning model
(student). The original idea is to let the compact student model
mimic the teacher model to achieve comparable or even superior
performance.
Lately, KD has also demonstrated potential benefits in
enhancing training performance [34], adversarial robustness
[35], and data augmentation [36]. According to whether the
teacher model is updated simultaneously with the student model,
the learning mechanisms of KD can be categorized into three
main groups: offline distillation, online distillation, and selfdistillation. Most of the previous KD methods work offline,
where the teacher model is pre-trained, and only the smaller
student model is updated with the guidance of the well-trained
teacher model during distillation [33]. Online distillation is

4

proposed to eliminate the need for a large-capacity highperformance teacher model [37]. Both the teacher and student
models are updated simultaneously, and the whole KD framework is end-to-end trainable [38]. Specifically, mutual learning
[37] and co-distillation [39] train multiple neural networks that
work with the same architecture in a collaborative way, where
any one network can be the student model and is trained by
transferring the knowledge from the other teacher models. In
self-distillation, the same network acts as teacher and student.
Zhang et al. [34] first proposed to distill knowledge within the
network itself by transferring knowledge from deeper sections
of the network into shallow sections. Similarly, self-attention
distillation [40] utilizes the attention maps of higher layers as
distillation targets for its lower layers. Snapshot distillation [41]
is a special variant of self-distillation, in which the supervision
from the prior iterations of the network is taken to guide
the training of its later iterations. This method requires the
difference between teacher and student to be sufficiently large
to prevent under-fitting.
Offline KD has been utilized to remove the backdoor of
the trained model guided by the finetuned teacher model [42].
In FL, the defense against backdoor attacks takes place during
the training process. The threat model and information available
to the defender are completely different from those mentioned
above for centralized learning.
III. SPFL: S ELF -P URIFIED F EDERATED L EARNING
A. FL Setting and Threat Model
Our defense mechanism focuses on the horizontal FL,
where N data owners collaboratively train a model with M
parameters through an aggregator.
1) System Setting: Let the machine learning model be
f (X, w), where X and w are the input and model parameter,
respectively. The set of distributed training data of a client u
with n samples is denoted as Du = {(x1 , y1 ), · · · , (xn , yn )}.
The aim of FL is to fit an optimized global model across
the distributed local training data of participating clients. The
objective can be formulated as:
min G(F1 (fw , D1 ), · · · , FN (fw , DN ))
w

(1)

where Fk (fw , Dk ) denotes the local objective of the k-th client,
and G(·) denotes the aggregation
Pn rule of the local objectives. In
FedAvg, Fk (fw , Dk ) = n1 i=1 L(fi (xi , w), yi ) is typically an
empirical risk minimization by averaging a loss function L, such
as cross-entropyPloss. G(·) is set to be the weighted average of
N
αi Fi (fw ,Di )
the inputs, i.e., i=1PN
.
i=1 αi
A typical federated process for an iteration t [43] is
delineated as follows: (1) The server broadcasts the aggregated
model w0t−1 of the last iteration t−1 to the clients; (2) The client
u performs local training for E internal epochs on the local
t
= w0t−1 . The local model
training data Du , starting from wu,0
t
after trained by this iteration is wu ; (3) The server computes
the aggregation over the received model update1 and updates
1 The term update and parameter are used interchangeably for the value
submitted by a client to the server. The value, often a vector or a tensor that
focuses on the main learning task, is transmitted in plain, perturbed or encoded
form depending on the aggregation algorithm, which can have a variety of
incarnations with different privacy guarantees for different threat models.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

the global
model by w0t = fagg (wit ) for i ∈ [1, N ]. In FedAvg,
P
α
wt
w0t = P αi i i . This process is repeated multiple iterations until
convergence to obtain the final global model parameters wfinal .
If fagg (wit ) is computed by secure aggregation, the protected model data [[wut ]] instead of the plain wut is exchanged.
Thus, each local model update wut can be accessed only by its
data owner u. The aggregated intermediate model fagg (wit ) and
the final trained model wfinal will be released to the clients. For
brevity, we omit the [[·]] symbol of [[wut ]] with the understanding
that protected updates are allowed.
2) Threat Model: We consider two types of threat model in
FL [44]. One threat model assumes that the adversary can have
access to only the training data but not the training process. The
adversary may be the data provider, who can pollute the training
data to create an attack. Another assumes that the adversary
has access to the local model as well as the training data.
In addition to modifying the training data, the adversary can
also manipulate the training process or updated parameters. We
further assume that a determined adversary is powerful enough
to fully control a set of up to Nm clients, and may also control
the server. The controlled malicious clients could arbitrarily
deviate from the protocol. Otherwise, the adversary is assumed
to have no control over the rest of the benign clients nor has
access to their data or model updates. We also assume that the
adversary has full knowledge of the aggregation algorithm and
configuration parameters but does not have the ability to tamper
with them.
The goal of the adversary is to compromise the integrity of
the trained model, by making the final global model fail only on
a specific task while performing reasonably well on the original
tasks. In addition, no client can notice that the distributed
global model has been compromised even by subjecting the
model to a rigorous evaluation of their own dataset. To this
end, the controlled client v uses a malicious objective function
Hv (wt , Dv∗ ) to update the local model. Note that Hv (·) is not
modified in data poisoning. It merely incorporates the attack
goal in model poisoning. It is Dv∗ that manipulates the training
data. In other words, our defense imposes no constraint on the
attack methods used to realize Hv (·) and Dv∗ . Any feasible
combinations of data and/or model poisoning attack methods
can be applied.
3) Desiderata of Robust FL: Based on the above threat
model, an active defense for robust FL scheme should possess
the following desirable properties: (1) Integrity security: the
scheme should be able to mitigate the influence of poisoning
attacks from a large number of malicious clients. The final
deployed model should perform normally on the adversarychosen inputs. (2) Model quality: a strong security guarantee
should not be achieved at the cost of model quality. The main
task performance of the resulting model must be comparable
to that without the defense. (3) No violation of the privacy
principle: the method should work with the secure aggregation
mechanism of FL. It should not leak or mandate sharing of individual model updates in plaintext. (4) No extra assumption: the
defense should be implementable without requiring additional
assumptions like the existence of a trusted server or public clean
dataset that may not be viable in real-world scenarios.

5

B. Proposed Robust FL Scheme by Self-Distillation
In what follows, we provide a high-level overview of SPFL
before introducing its underlying local training process and
ensemble prediction method.
1) Overview of SPFL: We illustrate the overall process of
SPFL in Fig 1. Our proposed SPFL relies on self-distillation
to purify malicious model received by each client. It enables
benign clients to take advantage of the historical information
of trusted local models to supervise their training process
by knowledge transfer. The local teacher and student models
are optimized simultaneously during training. At the inference
phase, the information of both models are combined to make
the final prediction.
Algorithm 1 depicts the simple modifications SPFL made
on the client’s training process. At the beginning of the training,
i.e., when t = 0, the local (student) model is set as the initialized
global model. Each client first trains its student model from
scratch independently. In this step, the models are trained by
minimizing the task-specific loss function that measures the
error between the predicted and ground-truth labels of the
local training data. The training is performed iteratively for
E local internal epochs. At the end of this step, the vector
0
of the trained student model is sent to the server for
wi,S
aggregation. Meanwhile, each client utilize the parameters of
0
to initialize the local teacher model. For
locally trained wi,S
each subsequent step t > 0 after model aggregation, each client
updates the local model following the LOCALKD algorithm
(see Algorithm 2 in Sec. III-B2), starting from the aggregated
result of the updated model of the last iteration, which is w0t ←−
t
fagg (wi,S
)∀i ∈ [1, N ]. Self-KD instead of SGD is performed
by the benign clients to update the local model in LOCALKD
algorithm. The aim is to mitigate possible pollutions introduced
into the aggregated result by the adversaries. The teacher model
t−1
wi,T
is the uncontaminated local model of the last iteration
before aggregation. The student model w0t is the aggregated
model to be trained. Both are updated in reciprocity to enhance
the integrity and performance of the trained model. Then, the
updated teacher model is used for teaching in the next iteration,
and the parameters of updated student model are uploaded to
the server for aggregation. This process is repeated until the
model converges, or the preset number of training iterations
has been reached. Through this process, the student model
learns not only from local data during the LOCALKD training,
but also from data of other clients during the aggregation.
If the global model is corrupted by updates from malicious
clients through aggregation, the local teacher model helps to
correct the malicious behavior via distillation. Meantime, the
teacher model also benefits from the maximization of mutual
information by knowledge distilled from the student model. It
should be noted that fagg (·) and [[·]] in Algorithm 1 are generic,
which allows the purification to be made regardless of the
FL aggregation algorithms or privacy-preserving and security
measures implemented at the server.
After completing the training process, each client obtains
a personalized teacher model and a personalized student model.
To make the prediction more robust, each client runs ENSPRE
algorithm (see Sec III-B3), which merges the features of both
models to output the prediction of the input sample.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

Fig. 1: An overview of SPFL.

Algorithm 1 Robust Federated Learning Scheme
Input: Initialized global model w0
During training phase:
for iteration t ∈ [0, T ] do
if t = 0 then
for i ∈ [1, N ] clients in parallel do
t
as w0
Initialize the local student model wi,S
t
with FedAvg steps
Update local student model wi,S
t
t
as wi,S
Initialize the local teacher model wi,T
t
]] to the server
Send [[wi,S
end for
else
for i ∈ [1, N ] clients in parallel do
t−1
t
t
←− LOCALKD(w0t , wi,T
, Di )
, wi,T
Update wi,S
t
Send [[wi,S ]] to the server
end for
end if
Server does:
t
) for i ∈ [1, N ]
w0t+1 ←− fagg (wi,S
end for
During prediction phase:
for i ∈ [1, N ] clients do
T
T
, X)
, wi,T
Given input X, output Y ←− ENSPRE(wi,S
end for

2) Local Self-distillation Based Training: The selfdistillation based local training algorithm, LOCALKD is described in Algorithm 2. In training iteration t, each client i
simultaneously updates its teacher and student models with the
help of labeled local training data Di . Unlike traditional KD,
t−1
the teacher model wi,T
and student model w0t are essentially
the same model from different iterations. The teacher model is
kept as a local model and is trained by only the local training
data with self-KD, but the student model is re-instantiated by
the global model of the last aggregation at the server.
The local training algorithm needs to fulfil two objectives.
First, the teacher model is optimized for main task accuracy. To
facilitate learning from the local training data and knowledge
distillation from the student model, we divide the loss function
into task loss, which is used to provide direct task-specific
supervision, and distillation loss, which is used to transfer
knowledge from the logit output. Second, the student model
must be able to mitigate the backdoor effect by knowledge
transfer from the teacher model besides improving its main
task performance. From the explainability study of backdoor
attacks, differences in the saliency maps of intermediate layers

6

between the backdoored and clean models provide useful clues
to backdoor trigger localization [45]. To suppress the backdoor
triggers if presence, a third loss function that minimizes the
aggregated difference between the post-hoc attention maps of
the student and teacher models is added to train the student
model.
The training is performed locally by sampling minibatches or subsets from the training set. Each sampled set,
Bl , is fed into both the teacher and student models. For
an input x and a k-dimensional one-hot label y, a model
with parameter w produces the logit vectors z(w, x) =
[z1 (x), z2 (x), ..., zk (x)], and outputs the predicted probabilities
P (w, x) = [p1 (x), p2 (x), ..., pk (x)] by a softmax function.
Given the training data X and its corresponding label Y in
Bl , the task loss function estimates the difference between the
predicted and ground-truth labels by:
t
LCE,S = ϕ(Y, P (wi,S
, X))

(2)

t
LCE,T = ϕ(Y, P (wi,T
, X))
(3)
P
where ϕ(a, b) = − i ai log bi is the cross-entropy loss. This
loss is minimized over the parameter space to find the optimal
parameters that best fits Di .
The distillation losses for the student and teacher models
are formulated based on
Pthe Kullback–Leibler (K-L) divergence,
i.e., KL(a, b) = − i ai log(bi /ai ), between the softened
probabilities of the teacher and student models, as follows:
t
t
^
^
LKD,S = KL(P (wi,T
, X), P (wi,S
, X))

(4)

t
t
^
^
LKD,T = KL(P (w
i,S , X), P (wi,T , X))

(5)

where the softened probability P^
(w, x) is generated by the logit
vectors with τ as the temperature parameter to adjust the degree
of softening as follows [33]:
exp(zi (X)/τ )
P^
(w, x) = P
j exp(zj (X)/τ

(6)

The attention-based loss is measured by the distance between the attention maps of the two models. Given the activation
output of the l-th layer, Al ∈ RK×U ×V , where K, U and
V are the dimensions of the channel, height and width of
the feature map, respectively, the class-discriminative attention
representation Lc ∈ RU ×V for class c is computed by:
Lc (Al ) = RELU (

K
X

αkc Ak )

(7)

k=1

where Ak is the activation map of the k-th channel.The
weight αkc represents a partial linearization of the deep network
downstream from A. Backpropagation is employed to compute
the gradient of the score for the target class c before the
softmax function, with respect to the activation map Ak of a
convolutional layer. Subsequently, this gradient information is
utilized to assess the significance of each channel within feature
layer A by performing a weighted summation on the data in
each channel of feature layer A using the values of αkc . Finally,
a Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation function is applied to
the linear combination of maps to emphasize the features that
exert a positive influence on the class of interest.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

7

Based on the attention representation, an attention loss is
defined for the selected intermediate layer l ∈ L as:
X
Lc (AlT ) − Lc (AlS )) 2
(8)
LAT,S =
l

where L2 norm is used to measure the distance between the
teacher’s attention map Lc (AlT ) and the student’s attention map
Lc (AlS ).
Bringing it all together, the overall training losses for the
student and teacher models can be expressed as:
t
t
LS = LCE,S + βKD
LKD,S + βAT
LAT,S

(9)

t
LT = LCE,T + βKD
LKD,T

(10)

t
t
where βKD
and βAT
are adaptive scaling factors for controlling

the strength of KD between the two models.
During the distillation process, the incorrect predictions
from the teacher or student model may mislead each other in
the knowledge transfer. It is important to adapt the distillation
effort to the quality of trained model by changing the weight
of distillation loss progressively along the training process. The
model generally does not have enough knowledge about data
at the early training stage, and its generalization capability
improves gradually as the training progresses. So the adaptation
t
t
and βAT
can be simplified by increasing the values of βKD
t
gradually with the training iteration t. We compute βKD and
t
for each iteration using a linear growth rate, i.e.,
βAT
β·t = β·T ×

t
T

(11)

where T is the total number of training iterations and β·T is the
weight at the last iteration.
Each optimization is performed in two phases: (i) update
the student model by minimizing the individual loss via gradient
descent. (ii) update the teacher model whose distillation loss is
computed based on the updated student model. This process is
iteratively performed for E internal epochs to obtain the trained
t
t
. Parameters
and teacher model wi,T
local student model wi,S
t
of wi,S are sent to the server, while the trained teacher model
t
wi,T
is retained locally to guide the next iteration of training.
Algorithm 2 Local Self-distillation Based Training
Input: individual training data Di , number of internal training
epochs E, training configurations, global model w0t
t
Initialize local student model wi,S
= w0t , prepare the local teacher
t−1
t
model wi,T
= Wi,T
for internal epoch e = 1, 2, ...E do
for mini-batch Bl = [X, Y ] in Di do
Compute task loss LCE,S , LCE,T by (2) and (3)
Compute distillation loss for student LKD,S , LAT,S by (4) and
(8)
t
t
Update student model by wi,S
= wi,S
− γ ▽wt (LCE,S +
i,S
t
t
βKD LKD,S + βAT LAT,S )
Compute distillation loss for teacher LKD,T by (5)
t
t
Update teacher model by wi,T
= wi,T
− γ ▽wt (LCE,T +
i,T
t
βKD LKD,T )
end for
end for
t
t
return wi,T
, wi,S

3) Ensemble Prediction Method: The logit outputs of
the trained teacher and student models are averaged to
further neutralize any malicious residues from the student
model. For client i, given an input sample X, the algorithm
T
T
ENSPRE(wi,S
, wi,T
, X) first computes the ensemble logits by
z(wi , X) =

z(wi,T , X) + z(wi,S , X)
2

(12)

Then the softmax function is operated on the averaging
logits z(wi , X) to generate the final classification result.
IV. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSIONS
A. Experimental Setting
1) FL System Setting: Two representative machine learning applications are trained in the FL setting on which most
of the attack methods can be applied for comparison. The first
application is a handwritten digit recognition task. The CNN
model with two convolutional layers and about 0.2M parameters
is trained on the MNIST dataset [46]. The second application is
an image recognition task. ResNet18 [47] with 11M parameters
is trained on the CIFAR10 dataset [48]. Six aggregation methods
are used for each application: (i) FedAvg [10], the most basic
aggregation without any defense; (ii) Median aggregation [6],
an element-wise aggregation rule. For the j-th model parameter,
the master device sorts the j-th parameters of all the local
models and takes the median as the j-th parameter of the
global model; (iii) Approximate geometric mean aggregation
(RFA) [7], a nonlinear aggregation method that can detect
more nuanced outliers beyond the worst-case malicious setting,
and has enhanced security over other robust aggregation rules.
It is implemented by calling a regular secure average oracle
with built-in privacy guarantees; (iv) FL-WBC [29], a clientside defense where the clients perturb the parameter space
impacted by long-lasting attack during local training to mitigate model poisoning attacks; (v) RLR [23], a server’s side
backdoor defense method. For every dimension where the sum
of signs of updates is less than the selected learning threshold
θ, the aggregation server’s learning rate is multiplied by −1
to maximize the loss on that dimension; and (vi) SPFL with
average aggregation. For each of these aggregation settings, T
rounds of FL are performed among N = 10 clients. We set
T = 30 for MNIST, and T = 80 for CIFAR10.
2) Poisoning Attacks and Configurations: Based on the
threat model presented in Sec III-A, four state-of-the-art backdoor attack methods with various configurations are applied: (i)
DPA [4]. The attacker simply trains its model on backdoored
inputs. Each training batch consists of correctly labeled groundtruth and mislabeled backdoor samples [49]; (ii) MPA [4].
The attack is mounted by training the malicious model X
with poisoned training data, and then scaling up its weights to
ensure that its submitted contribution survives averaging. The
submitted update is calculated as wm = γ(X − w0t ) + w0t ; (iii)
DBA [16]. This attack involves several coordinated adversarial
clients (sybils), where all sybils only use parts of the global
trigger to poison their local models; and (iv) LIE [19]. This
method finds a set of parameters within the specific range that
the backdoor can be introduced without being detected, while
having minimum accuracy loss for benign inputs.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

8

TABLE I: Canonical attacks used in our evaluation.
Attack
DPA-5
DPA-9
LIE-5
LIE-9
MPA-SS
MPA-MS
DBA-4*SS
DBA-4*MS
DBA-6*SS
DBA-6*MS

Method

Nm

Fm

γ

DPA
DPA
LIE
LIE
MPA
MPA
DBA
DBA
DBA
DBA

5
9
5
9
1
1
4
4
6
6

every iteration
every iteration
every iteration
every iteration
one-shot
every 5 iterations
one-shot
every iteration
one-shot
every iteration

1
1
1
1
10
5
10
1
10
1

An attack succeeds if the trained model can misclassify
the triggered examples to the target label. To increase the
attack success rate, during the attacker’s training, we add a
special pixel pattern to 20 images in a batch of 64 [4], and
change their labels to 0 for MNIST and bird for CIFAR10.
Especially for DBA, the global trigger pattern is divided into
multiple local triggers and each local trigger is added by one
of the colluding adversaries. At the inference time, the inputs
are added with the same pixel pattern to trigger the backdoor.
We adjust the configuration of each attack method to change
the attack strength. The configurable factors are: (i) Attack
frequency (Fm ): For DPA and LIE, the attack can be made
more effective by repeating it at every iteration of FL. For MPA
and DBA, multiple-shot (MS) and single-shot (SS) attacks are
possible [16]; (ii) Scaling factor (γ): For single-shot MPA and
DBA, γ is set to 10. This is determined by γ = N/η [4] to
guarantee that the backdoor survives averaging when the global
model is replaced by the backdoored model2 . For multiple-shot
MPA, γ is set to 5, which guarantees the attack effectiveness
and utility of the global model. We found out experimentally
that when γ is increased to 10, the main task accuracy of the
aggregated model will be severely degraded. For multiple-shot
DBA, we set γ = 1 to support the every-round attack of the
original paper; (iii) Number of adversaries at each attacking
iteration (Nm ): For DPA and LIE, we evaluate Nm = 5 and
Nm = 9 out of 10 clients. For DBA, Nm is set to 4 and 6
out of 10 clients as in [16]. For MPA, if multiple adversaries
exist in a given round, their respective scaled-up updates are
divided evenly to keep the scaling valid. As the attack strength
is independent of Nm , Nm is set to 1. In general, state-of-theart attacks [19], [17] and defense [50] assume up to 50% of FL
clients can be compromised. Hence, we test our scheme with up
to at least this bound. The extreme attack with only one benign
client is also tested. The abbreviations of the canonical attacks
and their characteristics are listed in Table I.
3) Key Performance Metrics: Three metrics are used for
performance evaluation. The benign accuracy (BA) refers to
the prediction accuracy on clean samples of personalized models
when all the clients are benign. The main task accuracy (MA)
denotes the prediction accuracy of a personalized model on
clean samples under attack. The attack success rate (ASR)
is the ratio of backdoored examples that are misclassified as
the target label. Considering that different personalized models
are obtained by each client, the average value of all the client
2 N represents the total number of clients, and η denotes global learning rate
which controls the fraction of joint models that are updated every round. Our
setting is based on n = 10 and η = 1.

models is used to measure each metric. An effective defense
should reduce the ASR, while attaining a high MA when the
training is corrupted by poisoning attacks. BA is the baseline
with no attack. A practical defense should not degrade BA.
B. Results and Comparison
The MA and ASR of each FL method with increasing
iterations for MNIST and CIFAR10 datasets are shown in Fig.
2 and Fig. 3, respectively. Each subfigure corresponds to one
of the attacks listed in Table I. Different line colors represent
different defense methods, as indicated by the legend of Fig.
2(a). From these figures, we can conclude that:
(1) SPFL is resilient against both model and data poisoning
attacks, converges fast to very high MA while having very low
ASR consistently against all attack methods. Other defenses can
only reduce the ASR for certain attacks and attack settings, but
were broken by at least one type of attack at some iteration
as Nm and Fm increase. RFA and Median perform well
against model poisoning attacks (MPA-SS, MPA-MS, DBA4*SS and DBA-6*SS) where the magnitude of the malicious
model parameters is significantly different from the benign ones,
but fail to defend against colluding data poisoning attacks and
other attacks without scale-up where the attack is performed
every iteration by more than four adversaries (DPA-5, DPA-9,
LIE-5, LIE-9 and DBA-6*MS). For all canonical attacks, SPFL
maintains an ASR of around 0.1, which is as low as the fraction
of test samples of the target class. For scaled-up attacks, its
ASR is increased by at most 0.03 after the attack iteration, and
reduces in subsequent training iterations.
(2) SPFL defends well against persistent attacks. For
repeatedly mounted attacks, SPFL can still maintain a relatively
constant ASR of around 0.1 with increasing iteration. Although
FL-WBC can reduce the number of iterations over which the
backdoor survives under single-shot MPA and DBA, its ASR
increases gradually if these attacks are reinforced in subsequent
training iterations. It fails to fully mitigate the backdoor effect
against multiple-shot attacks.
(3) SPFL can defend poisoning attack with almost no
constraint on the number of colluding adversaries. The ASR
of SPFL stays at around 0.1 even with Nm = 9. For both
MNIST and CIFAR10, the ASR of RLR remains low at around
0.1 on only MPA and single-shot DBA attacks where only one
adversary exists in a single iteration, as shown in subfigures
(e), (f), (g) and (i). However, its ASR becomes as bad as
FedAvg with multiple colluding adversaries shown in other
subfigures except for DBA-6*MS attack in (j). Although six
adversaries simultaneously exist in one attack round of BA6*MS, the distributed triggers reduce the bias of the malicious
model update or cause different model data distribution of each
adversary, which keeps the aggregation of malicious model data
within RLR’s defense bound.
We also evaluate the Byzantine tolerance of all defenses
by increasing the number of sybils executing the DPA attack
from 0 to 9 in Fig 4 for MNIST. One adversary would suffice
to fully manipulate the model trained with FedAvg. The ASR
of RFA increases drastically as the proportion of adversaries
increases above 30%. The ASR of Median increases slowly
with Nm until half of the clients are corrupted, at which
point the defense breaks down abruptly. Similarly, RLR and

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

9

(a) DPA-5

(b) DPA-9

(c) LIE-5

(d) LIE-9

(e) MPA-SS

(f) MPA-MS

(g) DBA-4*SS

(h) DBA-4*MS

(i) DBA-6*SS

(j) DBA-6*MS

Fig. 2: Main task accuracy (left) and attack success rate (right) for canonical attacks on MNIST. Different defense methods are represented
by different line colors given by the legend on the top-left subfigure. Each subfigure presents the results of one canonical attack: (a) DPA-5
and (b) DPA-9 with attack mounted at every iteration without scaling up the shared malicious model parameters; (c) LIE-5 and (d) LIE-9 with
attack mounted at every iteration without scaling up the shared malicious model parameters; (e) MPA-SS with single-shot attack mounted at
the 19-th iteration with a scaling factor of 10; (f) MPA-MS with attack mounted every 5 iterations with a scaling factor of 5; (g) DBA-4 and
(i) DBA-6*SS with one-shot attack mounted at the 9-th (7-th for DBA-6*SS), 11-th, 13-th and 15-th (17-th for DBA-6*SS) iterations with a
scaling factor of 10; (h) DBA-4*MS and (j) DBA-6*MS with the attack mounted every iteration without scaling up the shared malicious model
parameters.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

10

(a) DPA-5

(b) DPA-9

(c) LIE-5

(d) LIE-9

(e) MPA-SS

(f) MPA-MS

(g) DBA-4*SS

(h) DBA-4*MS

(i) DBA-6*SS

(j) DBA-6*MS

Fig. 3: Main task accuracy (left) and attack success rate (right) for canonical attacks on CIFAR10. Different defense methods are represented by
different line colors given by the legend on the top-left subfigure. The red solid and dashed lines refer to RLR with θ = 4 and 6, respectively.
Each subfigure presents the results of one canonical attack: (a) DPA-5 and (b) DPA-9 with attack mounted at every iteration without scaling up
the shared malicious model parameters; (c) LIE-5 and (d) LIE-9 with attack mounted at every iteration without scaling up the shared malicious
model parameters; (e) MPA-SS with single-shot attack mounted at the 50-th iteration with a scaling factor of 10; (f) MPA-MS with the attack
mounted every 5 iterations with a scaling factor of 5; (g) DBA-4 and (i) DBA-6*SS with one-shot attack mounted at the 41-th (36-th for
DBA-6*SS), 46-th, 51-th and 56-th (61-th for DBA-6*SS) iterations with a scaling factor of 10; (h) DBA-4*MS and (j) DBA-6*MS with the
attack mounted every iteration without scaling up the shared malicious model parameters.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

11

(a) MNIST
(b) CIFAR10
Fig. 5: Benign accuracy comparison.

Fig. 4: Attack success rate for different number of adversaries on
MNIST.

FL-WBC can also withstand a limited fraction of sybils, but
they cannot defend against a broad range of black-box attack
configurations with a static set of parameters. The superior
Byzantine tolerance of SPFL over them is attributed to the
adaptive purification of adversarial perturbations. As the number
of adversaries increases, the poisoning effect is stronger upon
aggregation. The widening disparities between the student and
teacher models in turn intensify the distillation of SPFL to
forestall the extrapolation that jeopardizes the model integrity.
(4) SPFL can mitigate the influence of backdoor attacks
while improving the main task accuracy. From Fig. 2 and Fig.
3, its MA is actually higher than that of FedAvg for each
setting. Especially for the non-scaled up poisoning attack, the
MA of its final trained model on MNIST is 0.96, which is
up to 0.04 higher than that of FedAvg. On CIFAR10, SPFL
exceeds the MA of FedAvg by a range from 0.01 to 0.03
over all canonical attacks. Other defense methods have varying
degrees of sacrifice on the main task accuracy resulted from
noises added onto the local model or biased aggregation rules.
FL-WBC successfully mitigates or eliminates the influence
of poisoning attack, but its MA has dropped by up to 0.1
on CIFAR10. RLR also compromises accuracy, especially for
defending against attacks with multiple adversaries. We also
manually adjust θ to strengthen RLR for those attacks that its
ASR is still high. As indicated by the red dashed line in Fig 3,
the ASR is reduced with more significant sacrifice of MA.
SPFL avoids sacrificing model quality by using KD from
benign historical information to obliterate the malicious backdoor trigger from the aggregated model. At the same time, the
student model also learns from its past cumulatively purified
knowledge complementary to the knowledge learnt from other
client models through aggregation.
The BAs of all methods are compared in Fig. 5. SPFL
achieves the highest BA on both MNIST and CIFAR 10. It
even exceeds the BA of FedAVG by 0.006 for MINST and 0.02
for CIFAR10 without increasing the number of communication
rounds. SPFL has faster convergence and peak BA over FedAvg.
Under the benign setting, Median can also achieve the same
BA as FedAvg. The BAs of RFA and RLR trained models are
well preserved for MNIST, but are dropped by approximately
0.02 for CIFAR10. The BA of FL-WBC is reduced by 0.02 for
MNIST and more substantially by up to 0.1 for CIFAR10.

C. Attention Attribution to SPFL’s Robustness
SPFL transfers knowledge by gradient-weighted attention
map, which highlights the important regions in the network’s
topology for an input prediction. To demonstrate the necessity
of attention-based knowledge and the effectiveness of attention
map construction in backdoor mitigation, we substitute the
distillation loss function of SPFL with two contrasting loss
functions for comparison.
The first option, SPFL oA, omits the attention loss by
transferring only logits-based knowledge without the attentionbased loss for the student model, where the training loss is
expressed as:
t
LS = LCE,S + βK,D
LKD,S

(13)

The second option, SPFL NAD, calculates the attention
map by a simple sum instead of a weighted combination of
feature maps over all channels. Given the activation output of
the l-th layer, Al ∈ RK×U ×V , the attention map is represented
as:
L(Al ) =

K
X

|Ak |

(14)

k=1

(a) MNIST

(b) CIFAR10
Fig. 6: MAs and ASRs of SPFL with different distillation loss functions
against DPA-5 attack.

The MA and ASR against DPA-5 attack of the student
model trained with these alternative loss functions are compared
with those of SPFL in Fig 6. SPFL outperforms these alternative

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

12

LIE-5 attack was not successful on these methods in the earlier
experiments. The average distance between attention maps of
a trained federated model on clean input samples and on the
corresponding backdoored samples can be used to quantify the
effectiveness of mitigation. The smaller the distance between
them, the less likely the backdoor can be successfully activated.
This average distance for all samples in the test dataset is
calculated for each defense method against LIE. The distances
for SPFL, FedAvg, RFA, Median, RLR and FL-WBC are 2.09,
9.91, 10.03, 11.12 6.06 and 3.41, respectively. The smallest
value of SPFL corroborates its greatest resistance to poisoning
attacks.

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 7: Attention maps (AM) of SPFL trained model: (a) Input images
with backdoor trigger; (b) AM of teacher model; (c) AM of student
model before distillation; (d) AM of student model after distillation.

distillation options in suppressing the backdoor and preserving
the main task accuracy. The ASR of the student model trained
with SPFL oA increases with iterations to the peak value (i.e.,
1 for MNIST and 0.97 for CIFAR10) but its MA is lower than
SPFL by 0.01. This may be attributed to the reduced information
possessed by logits. Therefore, the logits of clean inputs are
less affected by the backdoor bias. SPFL NAD weakens the
influence of backdoor to a certain extent. However, as the
attack iterates, its ASR is higher than 0.9 eventually for both
MNIST and CIFAR10. The MA of the trained model has been
dropped substantially by a difference of up to 0.1 for CIFAR10.
Unlike SPFL NAD, which combines feature maps over all
channels evenly, SPFL performs a weighted combination of
forward feature maps, where the weight is derived from the
gradient of the score for ground-truth class with respect to
the corresponding feature maps. This way, more knowledge is
distilled from feature maps that contribute most to the correct
prediction.
Fig. 7 compares the attention maps of the teacher model (b)
and the student model before and after distillation ((c) and (d))
for three poisoned images with a white square trigger at the
lower right corner (a). As depicted in Fig. 7(c), the attention
maps of the backdoored student model before distillation are
completely biased towards the trigger region, causing misprediction. After distillation training supervised by the local teacher
model (Fig. 7(b)), the attention has been corrected to the region
for correct prediction in Fig. 7(d).
Fig. 8 compares the attention maps obtained from the
trained models of SPFL, FedAvg, RFA, Median, RLR and
FL-WBC under LIE-5 attack. For the models trained with
FedAvg, RFA and Median, the attention maps on the clean
image (top row) differ significantly from their attention maps
of the poisoned image (bottom row). The attention of these
trained models has been biased to the region where the trigger
pattern resides. On the contrary, the attention maps on input
with trigger are not shifted apparently for the federated models
trained by SPFL, RLR and Fed-WBC. This explains why the

V. C ONCLUSION
This paper presents a robust client-based defense against
poising attacks in FL setting. It leverages attention-based selfdistillation to independently purify the aggregated model received by each benign client to deliver credible performance
guarantee. Our experimental results show that SPFL can mitigate a variety of poisoning attacks even if the number of
adversaries and the attack frequency exceed the threshold defendable by state-of-the-art methods. Unlike existing defenses,
SPFL raises instead of trades main task accuracy for security.
As the self-distillation training needs only to be performed
by the benign clients locally, SPFL is drop-in compatible and
complementary with any aggregation methods, communication
protocols and privacy-preserving protection schemes applicable
to standard FL settings. It can be easily deployed to increase
the Byzantine tolerance of a FL system without sacrificing the
original quality and advantages attainable by other coexisting
components.
R EFERENCES
[1] Q. Yang, Y. Liu, T. Chen, and Y. Tong, “Federated machine learning:
Concept and applications,” ACM Trans. on Intell. Syst. and Technol.,
vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1–19, 2019.
[2] L. Zhu, Z. Liu, and S. Han, “Deep leakage from gradients,” Advances in
Neural Inform. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019.
[3] K. Wei et al., “Federated learning with differential privacy: Algorithms
and performance analysis,” IEEE Trans. on Inform. Forensics and Secur.,
vol. 15, pp. 3454–3469, Apr. 2020.
[4] E. Bagdasaryan, A. Veit, Y. Hua, D. Estrin, and V. Shmatikov, “How
to backdoor federated learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. on Artif. Intell. and
Statist. PMLR, 2020, pp. 2938–2948.
[5] P. Blanchard, E. M. El Mhamdi, R. Guerraoui, and J. Stainer, “Machine
learning with adversaries: Byzantine tolerant gradient descent,” Advances
in Neural Inform. Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017.
[6] D. Yin, Y. Chen, R. Kannan, and P. Bartlett, “Byzantine-robust distributed
learning: Towards optimal statistical rates,” in Proc. Int. Conf. on Mach.
Learn. PMLR, 2018, pp. 5650–5659.
[7] K. Pillutla, S. M. Kakade, and Z. Harchaoui, “Robust aggregation for
federated learning,” IEEE Trans. on Signal Process., vol. 70, pp. 1142–
1154, 2022.
[8] C. Fung, C. J. Yoon, and I. Beschastnikh, “The limitations of federated
learning in sybil settings,” in Proc. Int. Symp. on Res. in Attacks, Intrusions
and Defenses, 2020, pp. 301–316.
[9] H. Chang, V. Shejwalkar, R. Shokri, and A. Houmansadr, “Cronus: Robust and heterogeneous collaborative learning with black-box knowledge
transfer,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.11279, 2019.
[10] P. Kairouz et al., “Advances and open problems in federated learning,”
Found. and Trends® in Mach. Learn., vol. 14, no. 1–2, pp. 1–210, 2021.
[11] K. Bonawitz et al., “Practical secure aggregation for privacy-preserving
machine learning,” in Proc. ACM SIGSAC Conf. on Comput. and Commun.
Secur., 2017, pp. 1175–1191.
[12] Y. Aono et al., “Privacy-preserving deep learning via additively homomorphic encryption,” IEEE Trans. on Inf. Forensics and Secur., vol. 13,
no. 5, pp. 1333–1345, 2017.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2015

13

(a) Original image
(b) SPFL
(c) FedAvg
(d) RFA
(e) Median
(f) RLR
(g) FL-WBC
Fig. 8: Visualization of attention maps (AM) of models trained with different methods: (a) Original image; (b)-(g) AM of models trained with
SPFL, FedAvg, RFA, Median, RLR and FL-WBC. Results for clean and poisoned images are displayed on the top and bottom rows, respectively.
[13] Z. Liu et al., “DHSA: efficient doubly homomorphic secure aggregation
for cross-silo federated learning,” J Supercomput., pp. 1–31, 2022.
[14] Z. Liu et al., “SASH: Efficient secure aggregation based on shprg for
federated learning,” in Proc. Conf. Uncertainty Artif. Intell. PMLR, 2022,
pp. 1243–1252.
[15] V. Shejwalkar and A. Houmansadr, “Manipulating the byzantine: Optimizing model poisoning attacks and defenses for federated learning,” in
Proc. Netw. and Distrib. Syst. Secur. Symp., 2021.
[16] C. Xie, K. Huang, P.-Y. Chen, and B. Li, “DBA: Distributed backdoor
attacks against federated learning,” in Proc. Int. Conf. on Learn. Representations, Apr. 2020.
[17] M. Fang, X. Cao, J. Jia, and N. Gong, “Local model poisoning attacks to
byzantine-robust federated learning,” in Proc. 29th USENIX Secur. Symp.,
Aug. 2020, pp. 1605–1622.
[18] Z. Sun, P. Kairouz, A. T. Suresh, and H. B. McMahan, “Can you really
backdoor federated learning?” arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.07963, 2019.
[19] G. Baruch, M. Baruch, and Y. Goldberg, “A little is enough: Circumventing defenses for distributed learning,” Advances in Neural Inform. Process.
Syst., vol. 32, pp. 8645–8645, 2019.
[20] A. N. Bhagoji, S. Chakraborty, P. Mittal, and S. Calo, “Analyzing federated
learning through an adversarial lens,” in Proc. Int. Conf. on Mach. Learn.
PMLR, 2019, pp. 634–643.
[21] X. Cao, M. Fang, J. Liu, and N. Z. Gong, “FLTrust: Byzantine-robust
federated learning via trust bootstrapping,” in Proc. Netw. and Distrib.
Syst. Secur. Symp., 2021.
[22] L. Muñoz-González, K. T. Co, and E. C. Lupu, “Byzantine-robust federated machine learning through adaptive model averaging,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.05125, 2019.
[23] M. S. Ozdayi, M. Kantarcioglu, and Y. R. Gel, “Defending against
backdoors in federated learning with robust learning rate,” in Proc. of
the AAAI Conf. on Artif. Intell., vol. 35, no. 10, 2021, pp. 9268–9276.
[24] Z. Ma, J. Ma, Y. Miao, Y. Li, and R. H. Deng, “ShieldFL: Mitigating
model poisoning attacks in privacy-preserving federated learning,” IEEE
Trans. on Inform. Forensics and Secur., vol. 17, pp. 1639–1654, Apr. 2022.
[25] S. Li, Y. Cheng, W. Wang, Y. Liu, and T. Chen, “Learning to detect malicious clients for robust federated learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.00211, 2020.
[26] P. Rieger, T. D. Nguyen, M. Miettinen, and A.-R. Sadeghi, “Deepsight:
Mitigating backdoor attacks in federated learning through deep model
inspection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.00763, 2022.
[27] S. Shen, S. Tople, and P. Saxena, “Auror: Defending against poisoning
attacks in collaborative deep learning systems,” in Proc. 32nd Annual
Conf. on Comput. Secur. Appl., 2016, pp. 508–519.
[28] S. Andreina, G. A. Marson, H. Möllering, and G. Karame, “Baffle:
Backdoor detection via feedback-based federated learning,” in Proc. IEEE
41st Int. Conf. on Distrib. Comput. Syst., Jul. 2021, pp. 852–863.
[29] J. Sun et al., “FL-WBC: Enhancing robustness against model poisoning
attacks in federated learning from a client perspective,” Advances in
Neural Inform. Process. Syst., vol. 34, pp. 12 613–12 624, 2021.
[30] C.-L. Chen, L. Golubchik, and M. Paolieri, “Backdoor attacks on federated
meta-learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.07026, 2020.
[31] J. Zhang, D. Wu, C. Liu, and B. Chen, “Defending poisoning attacks in
federated learning via adversarial training method,” in Proc. Int. Conf. on
Frontiers in Cyber Secur. Springer, 2020, pp. 83–94.

[32] F. Tramèr, F. Zhang, A. Juels, M. K. Reiter, and T. Ristenpart, “Stealing
machine learning models via prediction apis,” in Proc. 25th USENIX Secur.
Symp., 2016, pp. 601–618.
[33] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, J. Dean et al., “Distilling the knowledge in a neural
network,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531, vol. 2, no. 7, 2015.
[34] L. Zhang et al., “Be your own teacher: Improve the performance of
convolutional neural networks via self distillation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Int. Conf. Comput. Vision, 2019, pp. 3713–3722.
[35] N. Papernot, P. McDaniel, X. Wu, S. Jha, and A. Swami, “Distillation as
a defense to adversarial perturbations against deep neural networks,” in
Proc. IEEE Symp. on Secur. and Privacy, 2016, pp. 582–597.
[36] H. Lee, S. Hwang, and J. Shin, “Rethinking data augmentation: Selfsupervision and self-distillation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.05872, 2019.
[37] Y. Zhang, T. Xiang, T. M. Hospedales, and H. Lu, “Deep mutual learning,”
in Proc. IEEE conf. comput. vision and pattern recognit., 2018, pp. 4320–
4328.
[38] D. Chen, J.-P. Mei, C. Wang, Y. Feng, and C. Chen, “Online knowledge
distillation with diverse peers,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. on Artif. Intell.,
vol. 34, no. 4, 2020, pp. 3430–3437.
[39] R. Anil et al., “Large scale distributed neural network training through
online distillation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. on Learn. Representations, 2018.
[40] Y. Hou, Z. Ma, C. Liu, and C. C. Loy, “Learning lightweight lane detection
cnns by self attention distillation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput.
Vision, 2019, pp. 1013–1021.
[41] C. Yang, L. Xie, C. Su, and A. L. Yuille, “Snapshot distillation: Teacherstudent optimization in one generation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp. 2859–2868.
[42] Y. Li et al., “Neural attention distillation: Erasing backdoor triggers from
deep neural networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. on Learn. Representations,
2021.
[43] H. Yu, S. Yang, and S. Zhu, “Parallel restarted sgd with faster convergence
and less communication: Demystifying why model averaging works for
deep learning,” in Proc. of the AAAI Conf. on Artificial Intelligence,
vol. 33, Jul. 2019, pp. 5693–5700.
[44] V. Shejwalkar, A. Houmansadr, P. Kairouz, and D. Ramage, “Back to the
drawing board: A critical evaluation of poisoning attacks on production
federated learning,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. on Secur. and Privacy, 2022,
pp. 1354–1371.
[45] M. Nwadike, T. Miyawaki, E. Sarkar, M. Maniatakos, and F. Shamout,
“Explainability matters: Backdoor attacks on medical imaging,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2101.00008, 2020.
[46] L. Deng, “The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine
learning research [best of the web],” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 29,
no. 6, pp. 141–142, 2012.
[47] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” CoRR: abs/1512.03385, 2015.
[48] A. Krizhevsky, G. Hinton et al., “Learning multiple layers of features
from tiny images,” University of Toronto, Canada, 2009.
[49] T. Gu, B. Dolan-Gavitt, and S. Garg, “Badnets: Identifying vulnerabilities in the machine learning model supply chain,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1708.06733, 2017.
[50] L. Lyu et al., “Privacy and robustness in federated learning: Attacks and
defenses,” IEEE Trans. on Neural Netw. and Learn. Syst., vol. 99, pp.
1–21, Nov. 2022.

