arXiv:2509.08089v2 [cs.LG] 8 May 2026

Hammer and Anvil: Toward a Theory of Backdoors in Federated
Learning
Lucas Fenaux

Zheng Wang

Jacob Yan

lucas.fenaux@uwaterloo.ca
University of Waterloo
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada

University of Waterloo
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada

University of Waterloo
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada

Nathan Chung

Florian Kerschbaum

University of Waterloo
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada

University of Waterloo
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) enables distributed model training but
is vulnerable to backdoor attacks, where malicious clients embed
attacker-controlled behaviors into the global model. Existing defenses fail against adaptive adversaries. In this paper, we present
Hammer and Anvil, a principled theoretical framework that categorizes backdoors by the deviation, 𝛿, of their updates to the mean
of the updates. We identify two fundamental defense types: Type
1 (The Anvil), comprising outlier detection and robust aggregation effective against large-deviation attacks, and Type 2 (The
Hammer), consisting of removal-based defenses effective against
small-deviation attacks. We demonstrate that defenses of a single
type and non-principled combined defenses inherently leave an
exploitable gap for adaptive attackers. To bridge this gap, we propose the principled combination of Type 1 and Type 2 defenses. We
evaluate our framework against a new, worst-case, full-information
adaptive adversary that knows the benign updates, the aggregation
algorithm, and its parameters, and yet this adversary fails against
our combined defenses. Our empirical evaluation across various
datasets and settings shows that single-typed and non-principled
combined defenses are easily broken, often by a single malicious
client. In contrast, our best combined defense variants, 𝐻𝐴𝐶𝑆𝐹𝑇
,
𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑚𝑒
𝐶𝑆𝐹𝑇
𝐻𝐴𝐶𝑆𝐹𝑇
𝐾𝑟𝑢𝑚 , and 𝐻𝐴𝑀𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖 −𝑀𝑒𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑠 , remain undefeated even in the most
adversarial settings. Our results provide a principled approach for
research on backdoors in federated learning.

Keywords
Federated Learning, Machine Learning Security, Backdoors

1

Introduction

Federated Learning [38] is a technique for efficient distributed learning in which data resides with the data sources, and only model
updates are aggregated to a central model. Although this distribution of data sources enhances privacy, it does not guarantee it,
and it creates opportunities for malicious clients to attack. One
example of such an attack is backdooring [2, 3, 5, 9, 12, 17, 18, 29,
34, 35, 44, 50, 56, 63, 64, 69, 71, 76, 77, 79–82], where clients embed
attacker-controlled behaviors into the model, such as a trigger that
forces any image to be classified as a chosen class. Backdoor attacks
have been shown to pose a significant threat in centralized machine
learning [18]. The emergence of federated learning has introduced
new attack vectors for backdoor attacks. Through malicious clients,
adversaries can embed malicious behaviors into the global model.

Many diverse defenses have been developed over the years
[1, 4, 6, 8, 11, 13, 15, 16, 19, 22, 26, 30, 31, 33, 37, 40–42, 45–49,
51, 54, 55, 57, 60, 66–68, 72, 74, 75, 78] to prevent these attacks in
the federated setting. These defenses can be separated into three
categories depending on when they appear in the federated pipeline:
pre-aggregation, in-aggregation, and post-aggregation [43]. They
can also be grouped by their underlying approach: outlier-detectionbased, robust-aggregation-based, or removal-based. Outlier detection defenses leverage differences between adversarial and benign
updates to distinguish between them. Robust-aggregation defenses
limit the impact of any update, thereby limiting the adversary’s
capabilities to insert a backdoor. Finally, removal defenses make
minor modifications to the model in order to remove the embedded
backdoor.
Crucially, we observe that different defense categories are effective against distinct types of backdoor attacks. Intuitively, backdoored model updates sent by malicious clients that deviate further
from benign updates will be detected more easily by outlier detection defenses. Likewise, since robust-aggregation defenses bound
the impact of any single update, beyond a certain threshold, further
deviations have no impact, meaning that a small deviation attack
has the same impact as a large deviation attack. However, removal
defenses have more difficulty removing these updates with large
deviations without damaging the model’s benign performance, but
they can easily remove attacks with small deviations.
From our observations, we reason about backdoors in terms of
their expected update deviation 𝛿 to build a principled theoretical framework for federated learning backdoors: Hammer and
Anvil. We categorize defenses into two types: Type 1 defenses
(the Anvil: outlier detection and robust aggregation), which are
effective against large deviation attacks, and Type 2 defenses (the
Hammer: removal), which are effective against small deviation attacks. From our categorization, it follows that defenses of a single
type cannot be robust without drastically affecting model utility, as
they fundamentally leave a gap for an adaptive attacker to exploit.
Hence, we argue for combining defenses using our principled theoretical framework. By combining non-interfering Type 1 and Type
2 defenses, we can reduce the exploitable gap for the attacker, or
even eliminate it.
We ground our principled theoretical framework in worst-case
assumptions for security to ensure secure deployment of FL in
any setting. Hence, we design a new adversary threat model for
federated learning: the full-information adaptive adversary.

Fenaux et al.

Our full-information adaptive adversary knows: the aggregation
algorithm, its parameters, and the benign updates submitted by
all other clients before it has to submit its own, for every epoch.
Our adversary can freely collude with the other malicious clients it
controls and can adapt to the benign updates submitted by the other
clients. Mirroring cryptographic scheme design, a defense robust
against our full-information adaptive adversary would implicitly
be robust against any attacker with more realistic assumptions.
We empirically validate our principled theoretical framework
in two steps: (1) We design principled adaptive attacks against 13
single-typed and non-principled combined defenses [6, 16, 21, 33,
39, 40, 45, 57, 61, 72, 73] following our theoretical framework. Our
adaptive attacks break these defenses with at most four malicious
clients out of 20, and as few as a single one; (2) We evaluate our
principled combined defense HA against our full-information adaptive adversary and existing popular and state-of-the-art attacks
across various data settings. We find that our three best principled combined defense variants, namely HACSFT
, HACSFT
Krum , and
Flame
CSFT
HAMulti-Metrics , are undefeated in every setting we evaluate.
Our empirical results support our theory and enable principled
research on backdoor attacks in federated learning.
We summarize our contributions as follows:
• We present a new principled theory of backdoors in federated learning: Hammer and Anvil in Section 4. Our theory
categorizes defenses into two types: Type 1 (Anvil) and
Type 2 (Hammer), and reveals a fundamental exploitable
gap in single-typed defenses and for non-principled combined defenses. We then derive rules for the principled
combination of backdoor defenses.
• We introduce a new worst-case threat model: the fullinformation adaptive adversary in Section 3 and use it to
break single-typed and non-principled combined defenses
in Section 5.
• We empirically evaluate our principled combined defense
HA in Section 6. We show that our three best combined
defense variants are undefeated in the worst-case threat
model, showcasing state-of-the-art performance. Our empirical results provide support for our theory.

2

Background

Notation: Let 𝑤 ∈ R𝑘 represent the set of weights for a model. We
use the terms "model" and "weight of a model" interchangeably, as
all client models share the same model architecture. Let 𝑏 and 𝑑
denote datasets, while 𝐵 and 𝐷 represent distributions. The function
𝑇 is a training function that produces a set of weight updates 𝑢
based on a given set of weights and a dataset. Let 𝑛 be the number
of clients and 𝑚 the number of malicious clients.

2.1

Federated Learning

Federated Learning (FL) [38] is a distributed machine learning approach where multiple clients collaboratively train a global model
without centralizing their local datasets. Formally, 𝑛 clients collaborate to train a shared model by aggregating updates computed
locally on distributed datasets ( 𝑑𝑖 ∼ 𝐷, 𝑖 ∈ {1, . . . , 𝑛}). These updates are aggregated by the aggregator to create the global model
𝑤. We detail the training process for any epoch 𝑡 below; this series

of steps is repeated until convergence or a predefined number of
epochs (𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥 ) is reached.
(1) (Initialization Phase) The aggregator sends the global
model 𝑤𝑡 to a subset of clients of size 𝑠.
(2) (Training Phase) Each client in the subset trains its copy
of the global model on its dataset 𝑑𝑖 to generate its update
𝑢𝑖 . The clients then send their update 𝑢𝑖 to the aggregator.
(3) (Aggregation Phase) The aggregator aggregates the clients’
updates, yielding the new global model 𝑤𝑡 +1 .
The standard aggregation rule is averaging (FedAvg [38]), given by:
Í
𝑤𝑡 +1 = 𝑤𝑡 + 𝑠1 𝑖 𝑢𝑖 .

2.2

Backdoor Attacks

Backdoor attacks embed hidden attacker-controlled behaviors within
machine learning models during training [18]. Specifically, the attacker aims to alter the model’s training such that the resulting
model behaves normally on benign inputs but produces attackercontrolled outputs when triggered. To trigger the attacker-controlled
behavior, the attacker can insert or exploit a pattern in the training
data [18], which will be learned by the victim model. Depending on
the type of trigger, backdoor attacks can be categorized as artificial
or semantic [43].
Artificial Backdoors: The triggers are artificially added, typically
as a distinct pattern or patch (e.g., a white square in the corner of
the image).
Semantic Backdoors: The triggers exploit natural features of inputs, associating specific features with attacker-controlled behavior
(e.g., green cars).
Attack Objectives. The attacker’s objective is to maximize the
Attack Success Rate (ASR), as in the proportion of backdoored inputs that trigger attacker-controlled behavior, while maintaining
accuracy on the model’s main task, which we will refer to as benign accuracy or accuracy. Backdoor attacks can be modeled as a
multi-objective optimization problem, where the attacker seeks to
optimize the model’s behavior across both benign and backdoored
inputs. For a dataset 𝑑 of input-label pairs drawn from a benign
distribution 𝐷, a backdoor dataset 𝑏 drawn from a backdoored distribution 𝐵, and a loss function 𝐿 (for example, Cross-Entropy [7]
for image classification), the attacker aims to minimize:
∑︁
∑︁
min
𝐿(𝑥𝑖 , 𝑦𝑖 ) +
𝐿(𝑥𝑖′, 𝑦𝑖′ )
(1)
(𝑥𝑖 ,𝑦𝑖 ) ∈𝑑

2.3

(𝑥𝑖′ ,𝑦𝑖′ ) ∈𝑏

Backdoor Defenses

In scenarios where backdoor attacks pose a threat to the integrity of
an FL model, the aggregator may deploy a defense [1, 4, 6, 8, 11, 13,
15, 16, 19, 22, 26, 30, 31, 33, 37, 40–42, 45–49, 51, 54, 55, 57, 60, 66–
68, 72, 74, 75, 78]. When deploying a defense, the aggregator must
balance two objectives: backdoor removal and benign accuracy
preservation. Different approaches have been devised over the
years and can be categorized as follows:
Robust-aggregation: limit the impact of any update, thereby limiting the impact of adversarial updates and the adversary’s capabilities to insert a backdoor. Targets large deviation magnitudes.
Outlier Detection: leverage the differences between adversarial

Hammer and Anvil: Toward a Theory of Backdoors in Federated Learning

Train Acc
Train ASR

Figure 1: Learning rate scheduling of super-fine-tuning,
taken from the original paper [52].

Accuracy / ASR (%)

100

2.3.1 Clipped-Super-Fine-Tuning. We adapt Super-Fine-Tuning
(SFT) [52], a removal defense designed for centralized training, to
the federated setting. SFT removes backdoors by fine-tuning the
global model on a small benign dataset using a specialized learning rate schedule, as illustrated in Figure 1. However, we find that
vanilla SFT performs poorly in FL; the high learning rate required
during the first phase often leads to gradient explosion, destroying the model weights. This behavior suggests either that the SFT
algorithm is highly sensitive to hyperparameters, or that the loss
landscape of models trained in a federated setting is fundamentally
different from that of models trained centrally and does not respond
to SFT in the same way.
To mitigate this instability, we introduce Clipped-Super-FineTuning (CSFT), which incorporates gradient clipping into the SFT
process. With an appropriately tuned clipping threshold, CSFT effectively removes "weakly inserted" backdoors (small devations),
as demonstrated in Figure 2, where CSFT successfully removes a
non-adaptive Badnet [18] backdoor implanted by a single malicious
attacker out of 20 in a ResNet18 [20] on the CIFAR-10 dataset [25].
Notably, we find that the optimal clipping threshold depends primarily on the number of fine-tuning samples, significantly reducing
the need for exhaustive hyper-parameter searches.

ASR

100.0
88.3
78.778.9
80.7

80

74.5

73.0

60
40
20
0

and benign updates to distinguish them. Also targets large deviation magnitudes.
Removal: make minor modifications to the model in order to remove the embedded backdoor. Targets small deviation magnitudes.
Some existing works combine multiple approaches to create
more effective defenses; for example, FLAME [45] first detects malicious updates using cosine-similarity-based clustering, then limits
the impact of selected updates by clipping their norms to the median norm and adding noise. We study FLAME and other existing
defenses, and their weaknesses in more detail in Section 5.
An important consideration is the location in the FL pipeline
where a defense operates: pre-aggregation, in-aggregation, or postaggregation [43], with detection defenses often operating preaggregation, robust-aggregation defenses operating in-aggregation,
and removal defenses operating post-aggregation.

Metric
Accuracy

25.1
10.0

no_clip

6.4

1

2

Clip Threshold

5

10

Figure 2: Federated models backdoored with 𝑚 = 1 malicious
clients, fine-tuned with 2000 samples over different gradient
clipping thresholds.

2.4

Limitations and Assumptions in Federated
Learning

The distributed nature of federated learning makes defending against
backdoors particularly challenging, as the aggregator has limited
visibility into individual clients’ behavior. Additionally, thanks to
their full control over malicious clients, attackers can deploy more
potent attack methods that extend beyond simply adding trigger
patterns to the data and flipping labels.
Attacker limitations and assumptions. A common assumption in
federated learning security is that the majority of clients are benign
(also called trustworthy) [65]; therefore, an attacker can only control
a malicious minority of clients. Formally, a subset of 𝑚 ≤ ⌊ 𝑛−1
2 ⌋
malicious clients submit model updates to the aggregator. Krum [6],
one of the defenses we study in this work, assumes that 2𝑚 + 2 < 𝑛,
meaning 𝑚 < 𝑛2 − 1. Since we run our experiments with 𝑛 = 20, we
use a tighter bound of 𝑚 ≤ 8 across our experiments rather than
the 𝑚 ≤ 9 offered by the malicious minority assumption. Another
limitation for the attacker is the requirement to preserve benign
accuracy. Otherwise, the attack is easily detectable, and the model
is not deployed, meaning the attacker cannot exploit it.
Defender limitations and assumptions. We assume the aggregator
has a small, benign dataset drawn from 𝐷 for fine-tuning, as in
MASA [73]. In practice, the aggregator could be a trusted client
using its own data for fine-tuning, or the data could be sourced from
public proxy data or a small set of opt-in user data. To maintain
the necessity of the federated framework, this dataset must be a
fraction of the total training data (e.g., 1%-4%). If the aggregator held
a larger portion, a centralized model could be trained locally, rendering federated learning obsolete. In our experiments, we strictly
limit the fine-tuning set to be smaller than the average client’s local
dataset. For instance, our 2000-sample (4%) set is below the average

Fenaux et al.

per-client sample count of 2,400, effectively treating the aggregator
as a single trusted client. We study the effect of the number of finetuning samples in Section 6.5. Furthermore, we acknowledge that
while backdoors can always be removed through extreme weight
transformations (e.g., random re-initialization), such measures are
trivial and provide no utility. A viable defense must therefore preserve benign accuracy while preventing backdoors.

Scenario A: Type 1 Defense Only
Defense 1:
Robust Aggregation
or Outlier Detection

Exploitable Gap

𝛿
(Attack Magnitude)

𝛿1

Scenario B: Type 2 Defense Only

3

Motivation & Threat Model

Achieving trustworthy and secure FL requires a principled approach
grounded in worst-case assumptions. Mirroring the design of cryptographic schemes, we assume a nigh-omniscient attacker to establish a blueprint for security; a defense robust against this adversary
will inherently withstand weaker, more realistic threats.
We model an adaptive adversary that controls a subset of 𝑚
colluding malicious clients, aiming to manipulate the FL training
process via malicious updates. To evaluate defenses under worstcase conditions, we grant this adversary full information: exact
knowledge of the aggregation algorithm, its specific parameters,
and the benign updates submitted by all other clients in each epoch.
In Section 6, we demonstrate that our principled defense approach
can reliably defeat this full-information, adaptive adversary.

4

Hammer and Anvil: Toward a Principled
Theory

Each backdoor attack can be categorized according to a set of parameters, including its impact on the model weights, the fraction
of malicious clients, its duration, etc. We consider the impact on
model weights to be particularly important in the design of our
theory. Let the expected deviation from benign updates 𝛿 be
𝑛−𝑚
1 ∑︁
𝛿 = ∥E[
𝑇 (𝑤 𝑗 , 𝑑𝑖 )] −
𝑛 − 𝑚 𝑖=1
(2)
𝑛
1 ∑︁
E[
𝑇 (𝑤 𝑗 , 𝑑𝑖 ∪ 𝑏𝑖 )] ∥ 2
𝑚 𝑖=𝑛−𝑚+1
for any given federated epoch 𝑗, where we have 𝑛 clients and each
client has a training dataset 𝑑𝑖 ∼ 𝐷, and we assume there are 𝑚 < 𝑛2
malicious clients with datasets 𝑏𝑖 ∼ 𝐵 drawn from the distribution
of backdoored samples 𝐵. 𝛿 represents the expected distance from
benign updates (or strength) of a given backdoor attack update, with
smaller 𝑙 2 -norm deviations having a small 𝛿, and larger 𝑙 2 -norm
deviations having a larger 𝛿.
Our principled combined defense is premised on the observation
that the success of existing defenses depends on the attack parameter 𝛿. We define two fundamental types of defenses based on their
success relative to 𝛿:
Type 1 - Robust Aggregation or Detection: The goal of the
aggregator is to discard malicious updates and update the global
model only with benign updates, or at least limit the impact of
malicious updates on the aggregation process. To do so, the aggregator attempts to identify outliers (which are likely malicious
updates, since 𝑚 < 𝑛2 ) from the client updates {𝑇 (𝑤 𝑗 , 𝑑𝑖 )}𝑛−𝑚
𝑖=1 ∪
{𝑇 (𝑤 𝑗 , 𝑑𝑖 ∪ 𝑏𝑖 )}𝑛𝑖=𝑛−𝑚+1 . It then removes those outliers, e.g., Krum
and Multi-Metrics, or bounds their impact, e.g., Median-of-Means
and norm bounding.

Defense 2:
Removal

Exploitable Gap
𝛿
(Attack Magnitude)

𝛿2

Scenario C: Principled Combined Defense

Type 2 Defense

Type 1 Defense

Exploitable Gap

𝛿
𝛿2

𝛿1

(Attack Magnitude)

Scenario D: Principled Combined Defense & Conjecture 1 is True

Strong Type 2 Defense

Strong Type 1 Defense
𝛿
𝛿1

𝛿2

(Attack Magnitude)

Figure 3: Progression of the defensive spectrum against varying attack magnitudes (𝛿). Scenario A and Scenario B highlight the exploitable gaps when relying on a single defense
mechanism. Scenario C illustrates minimizing the security
gap by combining mechanisms. Finally, Scenario D demonstrates Conjecture 1: an ideal state where the defenses overlap
(𝛿 1 ≤ 𝛿 2 ), completely eliminating the exploitable gap.
Type 2 - Removal: Assume the aggregator has a small, benign
dataset 𝑓 ∼ 𝐷 and fine-tunes the global model 𝑤 after aggregation
as follows:
𝑤𝜏 = (1 − 𝛾) 𝑤 + 𝛾 𝑇 (𝑤, 𝑓 )
(3)
for some 0 ≤ 𝛾 ≤ 1.
Using the distance 𝛿, we can make the following propositions
about existing defenses:
Proposition 1. The larger 𝛿, the more robust Type 1 defenses are.
Proposition 1 follows from two observations: the larger 𝛿 is, the
further in the 𝑙 2 -norm the malicious updates are from the benign
updates. Since 𝑚 < 𝑛2 , the benign updates outnumber the malicious
updates. As such, the further the malicious updates are from the
benign updates, the more likely they are to be detected as outliers
by outlier detection defenses. Therefore, a larger 𝛿 results in a
lower ASR relative to the equivalent undefended global model.
Robust aggregation defenses impose a limit on the influence any
one update can have on the aggregation process. Since the defense’s
limit naturally bounds 𝛿, the larger the 𝛿, the better the defense
relative to the equivalent undefended global model. Thus, it follows

Hammer and Anvil: Toward a Theory of Backdoors in Federated Learning

that a large 𝛿 improves the effectiveness of Type 1 defenses, and
Corollary 1 and Corollary 2 also follow.
Corollary 1. For all Type 1 defenses, there exists 𝛿 1 such that it
will remove the backdoor for any 𝛿 > 𝛿 1 .
Corollary 2. For all Type 1 defenses that admit learning (i.e., at
least one update), there exists 𝛿 1′ such that a backdoor update with
𝛿 < 𝛿 1′ will pass the defense.
Proposition 2. Let 𝜀 ∈ R𝑘 be a matrix of small random values, i.e
∥𝜀 ∥ 2 ≪ ∥𝑤 ∥ 2 . The smaller 𝛿, the more the global model approaches
𝑤𝜏 = 𝑇 (·, 𝑓 ) + 𝜀 under a Type 2 defense, i.e., a model trained on a
dataset drawn only from 𝐷.
Proposition 2 follows from the iterative learning process of neural networks that slowly converge after many epochs. Intuitively,
a Type 2 defense can remove the backdoor because 𝑓 is drawn
from the benign distribution 𝐷, thereby shifting the global model
weights towards those of a model trained only on 𝐷. The larger
the change introduced by the backdoor, the more backpropagation
steps are needed to remove it; consequently, the defender faces a
higher risk of benign accuracy degradation. Hence, Type 2 defenses
are most effective against weakly inserted backdoors, where 𝛿 is
small enough to be removed without overwriting the model with
one trained solely on the fine-tuning data.
Corollary 3. For all Type 2 defenses, there exists a 𝛿 2 such that
it will remove the backdoor for any 𝛿 < 𝛿 2 .
Corollary 4. For all Type 2 defenses, there exists a 𝛿 2′ such that
a backdoor update with 𝛿 > 𝛿 2′ will not be removed.
Given either only a Type 1 or Type 2 defense, it follows from
Corollary 2 and Corollary 4 that an attacker should be able to
succeed. We empirically demonstrate such attacks against existing
defenses in Section 5 using optimization, scaling, or interpolation
to adapt to the protection objectives.
When combining a Type 1 defense and a Type 2 defense, it
follows from Corollary 1 and Corollary 3 that an attacker can only
succeed for 𝛿 ∈ [𝛿 2, 𝛿 1 ]. Figure 3 illustrates this defensive spectrum;
while each category effectively secures one end of the magnitude
range, a gap remains where neither succeeds.
Research Question 1: Can we reliably identify a successful principled attack given any single-typed or non-principled combined defense?
Research Question 2: When combining Type 1 and 2 defenses,
can 𝛿 1 − 𝛿 2 be non-positive, meaning that even worst-case adaptive
adversaries cannot succeed?
We hypothesize that with the correct defenses, the gap in our
second research question can be eliminated entirely.
Conjecture 1. There exists a Type 1 defense and a Type 2 defense
such that 𝛿 2 ≥ 𝛿 1 .
If Conjecture 1 holds, it implies the existence of a principled defense that can defend against any backdoor for any attack deviation
𝛿.

5

Exploiting the Gap in Existing Defenses

Our goal in this section is to provide empirical evidence to support Corollary 2 and Corollary 4 by showing that for all existing
defenses we evaluate, we can define an adaptive attack that easily
breaks the defense. To evaluate the limits of current defenses, we
develop a suite of adaptive attacks designed to exploit the fundamental weaknesses of each defense category. By leveraging the full
information capabilities of our adaptive adversary, these attacks
bypass singular and non-principled security mechanisms. In the
following, we outline the general principles for circumventing each
category, then detail the specific implementation for each defense.
We display simplified representations of the attack principles for
each defense category in Figure 4.

5.1

Adaptive Attack Principles

Robust-Aggregation Defenses. Robust aggregation mechanisms
aim to bound the impact of any individual update on the global
model. Our strategy exploits this by ensuring the malicious updates
reach the maximum allowable impact bound, as shown in Figure 4a.
We achieve this by scaling the magnitude of the adversarial updates
relative to the mean, either through direct weight manipulation or
by increasing the local learning rate of malicious clients.
Outlier Detection Defenses. Outlier detection defenses use metrics
such as 𝑙 2 -distance, 𝑙 1 -distance, or cosine similarity to isolate and
discard malicious updates. We formulate our attacks as a multiobjective optimization problem, maximizing the backdoor signal
while minimizing the defense’s detection metric. Where possible,
we solve this optimization directly using interpolation, as shown
in Figure 4b; otherwise, we employ gradient-based techniques by
incorporating the defense’s scoring function into the malicious
clients’ loss objective, or a surrogate scoring function if the defense’s
scoring function is not differentiable.
Removal Defenses. Removal and post-processing defenses are
constrained by the need to preserve the model’s benign accuracy.
If the defense applies a transformation that is too significant to the
model weights, it risks destroying the utility of the global model. We
exploit this constraint by scaling the adversarial updates throughout
training, ensuring that the modification required to remove the
backdoor exceeds the threshold of safe removal for the defense, as
shown in Figure 4c.
Non-Principled Combined Defenses. Several works have attempted
to construct robust defenses by assembling multiple defense mechanisms into a single pipeline, such as FLAME [45], Fine-tune &
Prune [66], and FoolsGold & Krum [16]. While these multi-layered
approaches often outperform individual defenses, the lack of a
grounding principle behind their combination leaves them vulnerable to adaptive adversaries. For example, fine-tuning and pruning
are both removal-based, which prevent small 𝑙 2 -norm attacks but
leave them vulnerable to large 𝑙 2 -norm attacks; FLAME combines
HDBSCAN angle-based clustering, a defense against large angular
magnitude attacks, with clipping, a defense against large 𝑙 2 -norm
attacks, and DP-noising, a defense against attacks involving a small
number of malicious clients. Their combined defense leaves them
vulnerable to small 𝑙 2 -norm attacks carried out by many attackers.

Fenaux et al.

Bound

′
𝑤𝑚
Sc

Removal Zone

Accepted

le
Sca

ale

′
𝑤𝑚
Survives

𝑤𝑚

𝑤𝑚

𝑤𝑏

′
𝑤𝑚

Removed

𝑤𝑡

𝑤𝑏

Ideal 𝑤𝑚
(a) Robust Aggregation: The attacker scales
the initial malicious weights (𝑤𝑚 ) to rest exactly on the defense’s acceptance bound, maximizing impact.

(b) Outlier Detection: The attacker interpolates between the benign mean (𝑤𝑏 ) and the
ideal malicious weight, submitting the update
′ ) that just cross into the acfor weights (𝑤𝑚
cepted cluster.

(c) Removal Defenses: A weakly embedded
backdoor (𝑤𝑚 ) falls within the effective removal zone and is removed. By scaling the
′ ) past this zone, the backdoor surupdate (𝑤𝑚
vives removal attempts.

Figure 4: A simplified representation of single-typed defenses and their associated adaptive attack principles. Blue circles
represent benign weights, while red shapes denote adaptive malicious weights.
Table 1: Summary of defenses and corresponding attack
strategies with the relevant equations. Eq. stands for Equation.
Defense Type Defense Name

Attack
Strategy

Eq.

Type 1 (Robust Norm-bounding [57]
Median-of-Means [40]
Aggregation)

Scaling
Scaling

4
5

Krum [6]
Multi-Metrics [21]
Type 1 (Outlier MARS [61]
MASA [73]
Detection)
BART-FL [39]
AlignIns [72]

Interpolation
Optimization
Optimization
Interpolation
Optimization
Optimization

6
7
8
6
9
10, 11

Type 2

CSFT (This work)

Scaling

5

NonPrincipled
Combined

FoolsGold & Krum [16] Interpolation
Fine-tune & Prune [66] Scaling
FLAME [45]
Optimization
&
Interpolation

6
4 or 5
12

Table 1 contains a summary of the defenses for which we devise adaptive attacks separated by type, with the associated attack
strategy and a reference to the relevant equations.
For each category, we iterate through existing defenses in order
of recency and present either a scaling formula, an interpolation
formula, or an optimization objective that breaks said defense. We
present attacks against robust-aggregation defenses in Section 5.3,
outlier detection defenses in Section 5.4, removal defenses in Section
5.5, and non-principled combined defenses in Section 5.6. We also
include empirical results demonstrating the success of our adaptive
attacks in Section 5.2.

5.2

Motivating Results: Non-Principled
Defenses are Exploitable

We demonstrate that existing individual backdoor defenses are
insufficient under our defined worst-case threat model. Table 2
summarizes the vulnerability of seven state-of-the-art or popular
defenses [6, 40, 45, 52, 57] against our adaptive, optimized attacks
on a ResNet18 [20] model trained on the CIFAR-10 [25] dataset.
We do not empirically evaluate six of the 13 adaptive attacks
we design for the following reasons. FoolsGold & Krum [16] and
Fine-tune & Prune [66]: we already break one of the components
of each of these non-principled combined defenses in a way that
the other component cannot cope with; therefore, we expect these
two defenses to perform as well as their broken components, which
we already empirically evaluate. MARS [61], MASA [73], BART-FL
[39], and AlignIns [72]: we leave the experimental effort to future
work as we already empirically evaluate two outlier detection defenses (Krum and Multi-Metrics). These four defenses reuse similar
fundamental principles, so we expect the principled adaptive attacks we design against them to be as effective as those against
Krum and Multi-Metrics.
We break most defenses with as few as 1 or 2 malicious clients
out of 20. While some defenses show higher initial resistance, specifically, Multi-Metrics requires 𝑚 = 4 to break, they all eventually fail
as the number of malicious clients increases, reaching near 100%
ASR in the worst-case scenario where 𝑚 = 8, while maintaining
high benign accuracy. These failures stem from a fundamental vulnerability in current defense approaches. Most existing methods fall
into a single category, such as robust aggregation, outlier detection,
or removal, that targets only small or large attack magnitudes, leaving them vulnerable to the other. Furthermore, combined defenses
often merge sub-defenses of the same type, leaving a vulnerable
gap that a full-information adaptive adversary can exploit.

5.3

Attacking Robust-Aggregation

Norm-bounding (2019). Norm bounding, also called norm clipping [57], is an 𝑙 2 -norm-based algorithm that defends against large
magnitude attacks. In practice, norm-bounding can be efficiently implemented in cryptography using zero-knowledge proofs, making

Hammer and Anvil: Toward a Theory of Backdoors in Federated Learning

Table 2: Lowest number of malicious clients (𝑚) out of 20
needed for our adaptive attacks to break existing defenses
with the associated ASR and benign accuracies on CIFAR-10.
We also include the 𝑚 = 8 case. Values are averaged over three
runs.

we introduce a second malicious client, as shown in Table 2. We
also did not find any meaningful differences between MoM and
Rob-MoM against our adaptive attack.

′
𝑢𝑚
= 𝛾 · 𝑢𝑚 ,

Defense

𝑚

ASR

Acc.

ASR (𝑚 = 8)

Acc. (𝑚 = 8)

Multi Metrics
Flame
Rob MoM
MoM
Krum
Norm
CSFT
None

4
2
2
2
1
1
1
1

98.86
55.61
99.81
99.81
97.34
90.49
87.47
99.62

76.16
82.16
83.80
83.49
78.85
87.93
79.01
83.02

99.30
98.25
99.98
99.99
99.98
99.97
98.70
99.99

78.61
80.06
84.56
84.28
79.90
86.30
82.15
84.64

it a desirable defense for secure aggregation protocols [36]. Update
norms are clipped to a predefined threshold 𝜂 to limit the impact
of any single update during aggregation. Our adaptive adversary
exploits this clipping by directly scaling each malicious update 𝑢𝑚
to this predefined threshold, as described in Equation 4. To defend
against such an attack, a norm-bounding defender would need to
use a very small norm threshold, at the cost of a greatly reduced
model accuracy. We find that for any functional threshold, a single
adaptive malicious client is sufficient to break norm-bounding, as
seen in Table 2.
𝑢𝑚
′
𝑢𝑚
=𝜂
(4)
∥𝑢𝑚 ∥ 2
Median-of-Means (2023). Median of Means (MoM) [40] is a provably robust aggregation algorithm that aims to minimize the impact
of any one update on the aggregation regardless of its magnitude.
For each parameter layer in the neural network model, MoM randomly partitions client updates into groups. Then it computes the
element-wise mean for each group as its representative. Finally, it
takes the element-wise median of the representatives as the update
for that layer. In the MoM algorithm, outlier updates move their
groups away from the median, reducing the likelihood that they
are selected. To improve the robustness of the MoM estimation, we
can repeat the MoM algorithm 𝑘 times and average the medians
across the 𝑘 runs. We refer to this method as the Robust Median of
Means (Robust MoM, shortened to Rob MoM). In our experiments,
we set 𝑘 = 10 as we did not find further meaningful improvements
in robustness with higher values.
Despite MoM provably limiting the impact of malicious updates
on the aggregation, our adaptive attacker can still skew the median
in the adversarial direction. Scaling up the updates of malicious
clients following Equation 5 causes their updates to overpower
the others in their group, affecting the representative. The change
incurred by malicious updates to their group’s representative shifts
the median parameter selected in the adversarial direction for every
model parameter. While the change in the median is minor for
any individual parameter, the cumulative effect across the highdimensional weight space results in a significant 𝑙 2 -norm shift in the
adversarial direction. We find that while the defense is successful
when there is a single malicious client among 20, it breaks when

5.4

where 𝛾 ≫

max
𝑖 ∈ {1,2,...,𝑛−𝑚}

∥𝑢𝑏𝑖 ∥ 2

(5)

Evading Outlier Detection

Krum (2017). Krum [6] is a Byzantine-resilient detection method
that selects the most representative update based on its Krum-score:
the sum of the 𝑙 2 distances to its 𝑛 − 𝑚 − 2 closest neighbors. The
update with the lowest score is selected as the update to the global
model for that epoch. First, if the attacker controls more than one
malicious client, they can overwrite the malicious updates with
the mean malicious update. This process eliminates 𝑚 − 1 terms
from the sum when computing the Krum-score of the malicious
updates. Second, suppose the mean malicious update is still not
selected after this process. We can interpolate between the mean
of the malicious updates and the mean of the benign updates to
find the point on the line between the two that is closest to the
mean of the malicious updates, while selected by Krum. We solve
this directly using bisection with a maximal depth of 10. Using its
full information, the adaptive adversary iteratively simulates the
Krum aggregation process to perform an informed search along the
vector toward the benign mean. This optimization process ensures
the malicious update is selected while being positioned as close as
possible to the target weights. Let 𝑤𝑏 be the mean benign update
and 𝑤𝑚 be the mean malicious update. Given the maximal distance
𝛼 ∈ [0, 1] to the mean benign update on the line such that Krum
still selects the update, found by bisection, we can compute the
final malicious update as :
′
𝑤𝑚
= 𝛼𝑤𝑚 + (1 − 𝛼)𝑤𝑏

(6)

As shown in Table 2, our adaptive attack is successful against Krum
with a single malicious client.
Multi-Metric (2023). Multi-Metric [21] computes a multi-metric
feature vector composed of the pairwise 𝑙 1 -distance, 𝑙 2 -distance,
and cosine similarity between each pair of updated models. It then
applies a whitening transformation to weight the metrics into a unified score dynamically. Then it sorts the updated models by score
and selects the 30% with the lowest scores. Finally, it computes
a weighted average of the selected updates, where each client’s
weight is proportional to its self-reported training sample count
relative to the total training sample count across all selected participants.
The Multi-Metric score computation is entirely differentiable,
rendering it vulnerable to gradient-based adaptive attacks. Because
the defense relies on relative pairwise distances across the entire
pool of updates, the malicious updates directly influence the scores
assigned to the benign clients. We exploit this dynamic by formulating an optimization objective that not only minimizes the
malicious clients’ scores but simultaneously maximizes the benign
clients’ scores. We incorporate this into the malicious loss function

Fenaux et al.

as follows:
∑︁
1
𝑀 (𝑤𝑖 ,𝑊 )
min 𝜆E (𝑥,𝑦) ∈ (𝑑∪𝑏 ) [𝐿(𝑥, 𝑦)] +
𝑤
|𝑊𝑚 | 𝑤 ∈𝑊
𝑚
𝑖
∑︁
1
−
𝑀 (𝑤𝑏 ,𝑊 )
|𝑊𝑏 | 𝑤 ∈𝑊
𝑏

(7)

𝑏

where 𝜆 is a scaling hyperparameter, 𝑤 represents the malicious
model weights being optimized, 𝑊𝑚 and 𝑊𝑏 are the sets of malicious and benign model weights respectively, 𝑊 = 𝑊𝑚 ∪ 𝑊𝑏 , and
𝑀 (·,𝑊 ) is the differentiable Multi-Metric scoring function. Doing
so is sufficient to break Multi-Metric with four malicious clients, as
shown in Table 2. We also identify a critical integrity flaw in MultiMetric’s design: it relies on self-reported metadata for aggregation
weighting. By claiming an artificially large sample size, a selected
malicious client can perform a model replacement attack [2], effectively overwriting the global model weights at no additional cost
to the attacker.
MARS (2025). MARS [61] is an outlier detection defense that
identifies backdoored updates by evaluating the Backdoor Energy
(BE) of individual neurons. To amplify this malicious signal, the
aggregator extracts the highest BE values from each layer of the
local models to form a one-dimensional Concentrated Backdoor Energy (CBE) vector. The aggregator then separates these vectors into
two clusters using K-Means and the 1-Wasserstein distance to capture the overall probability distribution of the energies, regardless
of their specific neuron ordering. Finally, the defense aggregates
the trusted models by selecting the cluster with the smaller center
norm, or defaults to the majority cluster (MARS*) to resist adaptive
regularization attacks.
Our adaptive adversary can circumvent MARS by distributing
the backdoor signal across a wider set of model parameters, thus
flattening the Backdoor Energy (BE) and evading the top-𝜅% extraction filter. Furthermore, by explicitly minimizing the 1-Wasserstein
distance between the malicious and benign CBE distributions (Eq.
8), the attacker can ensure the backdoored update is indistinguishable from the majority cluster, compelling the aggregator to include
it in the global model.
𝑛−𝑚
1 ∑︁
min E (𝑥,𝑦) ∈ (𝑑∪𝑏 ) [𝐿(𝑥, 𝑦)] +
𝑊 𝑎𝑠𝑠 (𝐶𝐵𝐸 (𝑤), 𝐶𝐵𝐸 (𝑤𝑏𝑖 ))
𝑤
𝑛 − 𝑚 𝑖=1
(8)
Here, 𝑊 𝑎𝑠𝑠 denotes the 1-Wasserstein distance, 𝐶𝐵𝐸 refers to the
function that returns the Concentrated Backdoor Energy vector,
and 𝑤𝑏𝑖 represents the 𝑖-th benign model.

MASA (2025). MASA [73] is an outlier detection defense that
identifies backdoored models by exploiting their distinct behavior
during machine unlearning. Since malicious parameters are largely
inactive on benign data, backdoored models exhibit significantly
higher empirical losses when the aggregator attempts to unlearn
the main task using gradient ascent on a benign proxy dataset. To
enhance detection robustness, MASA addresses non-IID divergence
by fusing local updates with the global average, accumulating the
individual unlearning loss for each model, and discarding any update whose Median Deviation Score (MDS) exceeds a predefined
threshold.

Analogous to the adaptive attacks against Krum described in
Section 5.4 (Equation 6), an informed adversary can bypass MASA
using a simulation-guided bisection attack. By using their local benign data as a surrogate for the aggregator’s private proxy dataset,
the attacker can replicate the unlearning trajectory. Through a binary search between the target malicious update and the benign
center, as defined in Equation 6, the attacker can identify the maximum scaling factor that embeds the backdoor while ensuring the
simulated Median Deviation Score (MDS) remains below the rejection threshold.
BART-FL (2025). BART-FL [39] is an outlier detection defense
that filters malicious updates using a combination of dimensionality
reduction and statistical voting. The aggregator first applies Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to reduce the dimensionality of
received updates and then computes pairwise cosine similarities to
quantify their directional alignment. These similarity scores serve
as features for K-means clustering, which partitions the clients
into two groups. To reliably identify the benign cluster, the defense employs a multi-metric statistical voting mechanism based
on point-level mean similarity, cluster-level mean similarity, and
Median Absolute Deviation (MAD), ultimately aggregating only
the updates from the winning cluster.
The outlier detection pipeline of BART-FL, which relies on PCA
projections and K-means clustering, can be modeled as a differentiable constraint. Since a full-information adaptive adversary
observes the benign updates, they can locally simulate the aggregator’s dimensionality reduction. By optimizing malicious updates
to minimize the distance to the benign cluster while maintaining
sufficient intra-update variance, the attacker can ensure that their
updates are included in the selected cluster and that the backdoor
signal is preserved. We describe the adversary models’ loss function in Equation 9. Let 𝑃 (·) be the aggregator’s PCA projection
function, 𝑢𝑏 be the center of the benign updates, and 𝑊− 𝑗 be the
set of malicious clients excluding malicious client 𝑤 𝑗 .
min E (𝑥,𝑦) ∈ (𝑑∪𝑏 ) [𝐿(𝑥, 𝑦)] + 𝜆1 ||𝑃 (𝑢𝑚 ) − 𝑃 (𝑢𝑏 )|| 2
𝑤𝑗

− 𝜆2

∑︁
1
||𝑤 𝑗 − 𝑤𝑖 || 2
|𝑊− 𝑗 | 𝑤 ∈𝑊
𝑖

(9)

−𝑗

AlignIns (2025). AlignIns [72] is an outlier detection defense
that identifies backdoored updates by analyzing their directional
patterns at two levels of granularity. It first evaluates the overall
directional deviation of each local update from the global model
(𝑤𝑔 ) using Temporal Direction Alignment (TDA). Subsequently, it
performs a fine-grained Masked Principal Sign Alignment (MPSA)
to assess how well the signs of an update’s most critical (top-𝑘largest) parameters align with the majority sign across all clients.
Finally, AlignIns applies a median-based Z-score to filter out anomalous updates and clips the magnitudes of the remaining updates to
ensure robust aggregation.
AlignIns targets directional patterns through TDA and MPSA.
Our adaptive attacker can defeat MPSA by isolating the top-𝑘 parameters and optimizing them on benign data to mimic benign sign
alignments, as described in Equation 10. For the remaining parameters, the attacker can embed the backdoor signal while adhering to
a directional penalty and norm-clipping as described in Equation

Hammer and Anvil: Toward a Theory of Backdoors in Federated Learning

11, thereby ensuring the update passes both the TDA filter and the
MPSA check.
Let 𝑀𝑘 ∈ {0, 1} |𝑤 | be a binary mask where 1 indicates a top-𝑘
parameter and 0 otherwise, and 𝑈𝑏 is the set of benign updates. The
attacker splits the training into two constrained objectives.
For the top-𝑘 parameters (𝑤𝑡𝑜𝑝 = 𝑀𝑘 ⊙ 𝑤):
min E (𝑥,𝑦) ∈𝑑 [𝐿(𝑥, 𝑦)]

(10)

𝑤𝑡𝑜𝑝

For the remaining parameters (𝑤𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑡 = (1 − 𝑀𝑘 ) ⊙ 𝑤):
min E (𝑥,𝑦) ∈ (𝑑∪𝑏 ) [𝐿(𝑥, 𝑦)] − 𝜆 · TDA(𝑢𝑚 , 𝑤𝑔 ),

𝑤𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑡

subject to max(|𝑤𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑡 |) < min(|𝑤𝑡𝑜𝑝 |),

(11)

and ||𝑢𝑚 || 2 ≤ Median𝑢𝑏 ∈𝑈𝑏 (||𝑢𝑏 || 2 )

5.5

Circumventing Removal Defenses

CSFT (This work). Removal-based defenses attempt to purge
backdoors post-aggregation or post-training by applying transformations such as fine-tuning or pruning to the global model
weights. However, the efficacy of these methods is fundamentally
constrained by the accuracy-robustness trade-off: a defender must
remove the malicious signal without damaging the model’s benign
performance.
Our adaptive adversary exploits this constraint by optimizing
for backdoor durability. By strategically increasing the magnitude
of malicious updates during training, following Equation 5, the
adversary ensures the backdoor signal is deeply embedded within
the model’s weights. This optimization forces a scenario in which
any weight modification significant enough to eliminate the backdoor would concurrently significantly degrade the model’s utility.
We demonstrate this principle using CSFT, as described in Section
2.3.1. As shown in Table 2, our adaptive attack embeds a sufficiently
durable payload to break CSFT with only a single malicious client
while maintaining high benign accuracy.

5.6

Breaking Non-Principled Combined
Defenses

FoolsGold & Krum (2018). FoolsGold & Krum is designed to use
FoolsGold to mitigate sybil attacks (multiple malicious clients) and
Krum to handle single-attacker scenarios, providing, in theory, coverage against attacks with any number of malicious clients. However, we show in Section 5.3 (Equation 6) how to defeat Krum, and
in Table 2, we demonstrate that we can do it with only a single malicious client. Therefore, combining FoolsGold with Krum provides
no additional benefit over using Krum alone, and the combined
defense is broken by construction.
Fine-tune & Prune (2020). Fine-pruning and fine-tuning are both
post-aggregation defense strategies primarily effective against smallmagnitude updates. Consequently, our adaptive strategy for circumventing removal defenses (Section 5.5) following Equation 4 or
Equation 5 remains effective against this combination. This highlights that observing the principles for combination is key to designing robust combined defenses.
FLAME (2022). FLAME [45] integrates HDBSCAN angle-based
clustering, median-based clipping, and Differentially-Private (DP)
noising. While these components effectively mitigate large angular

deviations and high-𝑙 2 -norm updates, they remain collectively blind
to subtle attacks carried out by a larger number of malicious clients.
We model this vulnerability as a differentiable optimization problem
where the adversary must simultaneously: (1) minimize cosine
similarity to the selected cluster to evade HDBSCAN, (2) maximize
𝑙 2 -norm updates to counteract median-based clipping (similar to
our attack in Section 5.3), and (3) reinforce the backdoor signal
to withstand DP-noising. During training, we incorporate these
objectives into the malicious clients’ loss function:
𝛼 ∑︁
min E (𝑥,𝑦) ∈ (𝑑∪𝑏 ) [𝐿(𝑥, 𝑦)] +
(1 − cos(𝑤, 𝑤𝑐 ))
𝑤
|𝐶 | 𝑤 ∈𝐶
(12)
𝑐
+ 𝛽 ReLU(𝑙 − ∥𝑢 ∥ 2 ) 2
where 𝑤 represents the malicious model weights, 𝑢 its update, 𝐶
the set of benign weights identified by the clustering algorithm, and
𝛼 and 𝛽 are hyperparameters. As shown in Table 2, our adaptive
attack breaks FLAME with only two malicious clients out of twenty
while preserving benign accuracy. For the MNIST dataset [27] in
Section 6.4, we find it helpful to interpolate between the mean
malicious update and the 𝑙 2 -projected mean of the closest benign
neighbors when the malicious updates are not selected.

6

HA: A Principled Combined Defense

We mitigate the gaps left by existing non-principled defenses with
our principled defense approach: Hammer and Anvil (HA). HA combines defenses based on their categories, such that no defense’s vulnerability is exploitable. While Type 1 defenses are well-represented
by robust aggregators (e.g., Median-of-Means [40]), outlier detection algorithms (e.g., Krum [6], Multi-Metrics [21]), or hybrid
pipelines like FLAME [45], there are few Type 2 defenses, and even
fewer tailored for the unique constraints of FL. By instantiating
our Type 2 defense as CSFT, as described in Section 2.3.1, we can
systematically pair it with the Type 1 defenses evaluated in Table
2, namely FLAME [45], (Rob) MoM [40], Krum [6], Multi-Metrics
[21], and Norm-bounding [57], yielding: HACSFT
, HACSFT
,
Flame
(Rob) MoM
CSFT
CSFT
HACSFT
Krum , HAMulti-Metrics , and HANorm . The resulting principled
combined defenses support our theory. They offer empirical evidence for Corollary 1, Corollary 3, and Conjecture 1.

Proposition 3. A full-information adaptive attack that is optimal
against a Type 1 defense A is also optimal against HABA , for any Type
2 defense B.
Proposition 3 follows from Corollary 1: for an adaptive attack to
be optimal against a Type 1 defense, it needs to maximize 𝛿 < 𝛿 1
to maximize its impact on the global model; and it follows from
Corollary 3: for an adaptive attack to be optimal against a Type
2 defense, it needs to maximize 𝛿 to maximize its impact on the
global model such that 𝛿 > 𝛿 2 . Consequently, if there exists a
maximum reachable 𝛿 such that 𝛿 2 < 𝛿 < 𝛿 1 , an optimal adaptive
attack against the Type 1 defense will find it. Hence, if our fullinformation adaptive attacks are optimal against Type 1 defenses,
they must also be optimal against HA.
We demonstrate in the following sections that Hammer and
Anvil is effective at combining compatible defenses across a wide
range of scenarios. In Section 6.1, we provide empirical evidence

Fenaux et al.

Table 3: Lowest number of malicious clients (𝑚) out of 20
needed for our adaptive attacks to break our HA defenses
after fine-tuning, with the associated ASR and benign accuracies on CIFAR-10. >8 means we could not break the defense.
Original 𝑚 values required to break the original defenses
without HA are shown in parentheses. Values are averaged
over three runs.
Defense

𝑚

ASR

Accuracy

HACSFT
Flame

>8 (2)

13.66

74.86

HACSFT
Krum

>8 (1)

26.87

76.03

HACSFT
Multi-Metrics

>8 (4)

35.51

79.56

HACSFT
Norm

4 (1)

67.86

83.50

HACSFT
MoM

2 (2)

84.73

79.11

HACSFT
Rob-MoM

2 (2)

94.26

81.18

supporting Conjecture 1. We show that even in the worst-case scenario: our full-information adaptive adversary with 𝑚 = 8 out of
𝑛 = 20, our three best principled combined defenses: HACSFT
,
Flame
CSFT
HACSFT
Krum , and HAMulti-Metrics are undefeated. Then, we evaluate
HA against existing popular and state-of-the-art non-adaptive attacks in Section 6.2. We demonstrate that they are completely ineffective against HA, even in settings that heavily favor the adversary.
To support Conjecture 1 with further empirical evidence, we experiment with a non-IID data distribution of CIFAR-10 in Section 6.3
and the MNIST dataset [27] in Section 6.4. The non-IID data setting
is common in the FL security literature, as it represents a more realistic deployment scenario [21, 45, 61, 72, 73]. The MNIST dataset is
popular for extending experiments to other datasets [45, 61, 72]. We
CSFT
focus exclusively on the best combined defenses: HACSFT
Flame , HAKrum ,
CSFT
and HAMulti-Metrics .
We also present additional empirical studies on the effects of
hyperparameters on HA, specifically regarding CSFT, to measure
ease of use in real-world scenarios. We measure the effect of the size
of the fine-tuning dataset and the number of fine-tuning epochs on
CSFT
CSFT
the performance of HACSFT
Flame , HAKrum , and HAMulti-Metrics on CIFAR10.

6.1

Evaluating HA: Empirical Evidence
Supporting Conjecture 1

We present the evaluation of our combined HA architectures against
our full-information adaptive adversaries on CIFAR-10 in Table
3. The results demonstrate that our principled approach successfully closes the exploitable gap in three configurations (HACSFT
Flame ,
CSFT
HACSFT
,
and
HA
),
rendering
the
full-information
adapKrum
Multi-Metrics
tive attacker entirely unsuccessful even in the worst-case scenario
(𝑚 = 8). In another configuration, the gap is significantly narrowed
(HACSFT
Norm now requires 𝑚 = 4, up from 𝑚 = 1). Conversely, pairing
CSFT with MoM or Rob-MoM yields little improvement, indicating
that the success of our defense approach ultimately relies on selecting a Type 1 defense restrictive enough to overlap with CSFT’s
effective 𝛿-range. Ultimately, these findings provide supporting

Table 4: Evaluation of HA against attacks from previous work.
We report the ASR and benign accuracies (Acc.) for 𝑚 = 8.
Defense

HACSFT
Krum

HACSFT
Flame

HACSFT
Multi-Metrics

Attack

ASR

Acc.

ASR

Acc.

ASR

Acc.

DBA

3.61

72.50

3.77

77.37

3.84

78.74

BadNet

4.04

74.37

3.33

78.24

3.10

78.56

Neurotoxin

3.96

74.52

3.18

78.21

3.20

77.79

Replacement

21.69

74.80

3.93

77.62

3.30

78.05

Table 5: Lowest number of malicious clients (𝑚) out of 20
needed to break our HA defenses on non-IID CIFAR-10
(Dirichlet 𝛼 = 0.5). Original 𝑚 values are in parentheses. Values are averaged over three runs.
Defense

𝑚 (Original)

ASR

Accuracy

HACSFT
Flame

>8 (4)

12.63

70.14

HACSFT
Krum

>8 (1)

19.94

73.32

HACSFT
Multi-Metrics

>8 (2)

37.89

74.31

empirical evidence that Conjecture 1 holds true: through our
principled HA defense approach, it is possible to defend against
a worst-case, full-information, adaptive adversary with minimal degradation to benign accuracy.

6.2

Evaluating HA against Non-Adaptive
Attacks

We evaluate the constraint-and-scale attack (C&S) [2] (large deviation attack), the model-replacement attack (Replacement) [2]
(large deviation attack), the Distributed Backdoor Attack (DBA)
[69] (large deviation attack), and the Neurotoxin attack [79] (small
deviation attack). We present the results in Table 4, where we evaluate them against our three best HA variants in the worst-case
scenario: 𝑚 = 8 malicious clients out of 𝑛 = 20. We find that none
of them are successful, with HACSFT
Multi-Metrics displaying the highest
benign accuracies across all attacks. These empirical results further
reinforce the defensive capabilities of HA.

6.3

HA in the Non-IID Data Setting

In the real world, data is unlikely to be distributed independently
and identically (IID) across clients. As such, we study whether HA’s
performance is affected by a non-IID data distribution across clients.
We follow previous work [69, 73] and use a Dirichlet distribution
with a hyperparameter of 0.5 to assign data samples to the clients.
We present our results in Table 5 and demonstrate that even under non-IID conditions: 1) our full-information adaptive adversary
succeeds against individual defenses, with the needed number of
malicious clients ranging from 1 to 4; 2) all three of our combined
defenses are successful against our adaptive attacks regardless of
the number of malicious clients, even in the worst-case scenario of
𝑚 = 8.

Hammer and Anvil: Toward a Theory of Backdoors in Federated Learning

Table 6: Lowest number of malicious clients (𝑚) out of 20
needed to break our HA defenses on the MNIST dataset. Original 𝑚 values are in parentheses. Values are averaged over
three runs.

6.4

Defense

𝑚 (Original)

ASR

Accuracy

HACSFT
Flame

>8 (8)

21.79

97.73

HACSFT
Multi-Metrics
HACSFT
Krum

>8 (4)

37.12

97.56

Defense

Safe

Peak

Safe

Peak

Safe

Peak

Safe

Peak

>8 (1)

11.68

97.80

HACSFT
Flame
HACSFT
Krum
HACSFT
Multi-Metrics

98

98

94

94

93

93

96

96

97

97

99

99

100

100

100

100

100

100

94

94

91

91

97

97

m

HA on MNIST: Further Evidence Supporting
Conjecture 1

We evaluate HA further on a different dataset: MNIST [27], using a
LeNet [28] model. We show the lowest number of malicious clients
needed to break our best HA variants in Table 6. We find that HA
is successful against our adaptive attacks, mirroring our results on
CIFAR-10 in Section 6.1, providing further empirical evidence for
Conjecture 1, except that our adaptive attack against FLAME is
less successful. We posit that this change is due to the simplicity of
the MNIST classification task and the LeNet architecture’s lower
parameter count compared to ResNet, which makes it more difficult
for the adversary to hide the backdoor.

6.5

Table 7: Comparison of early-stopping epoch timings during
fine-tuning. ’Safe’ epoch reports the epoch that maximizes benign accuracy while successfully keeping ASR strictly below
50%. ’Peak’ epoch reports the epoch with the absolute highest benign accuracy regardless of the backdoor ASR. Both
strategies mandate a minimum of 10 fine-tuning epochs.

CSFT Hyperparameter Study

We empirically validate our hyperparameters for CSFT and show
that it requires no additional tuning when the Type 1 defense we
combine with changes. We are mainly concerned with the finetuning dataset size and the number of fine-tuning epochs. We show
that 4% of the total training set size, which is less than the data
of one client (5%), works almost best for our best HA variants:
CSFT
CSFT
HACSFT
Flame , HAKrum , and HAMulti-Metrics . More fine-tuning data yields
only marginal improvements. We also show that simply picking the
epoch with the highest benign accuracy after fine-tuning for 100
epochs is empirically optimal to maximize benign accuracy while
keeping ASR below the 50% threshold.
6.5.1 Effect of Fine-Tuning Dataset Size. A concern with defenses
that require benign data, such as CSFT or MASA [73], is the amount
of data necessary for the defense to function effectively. We show in
Figure 5 that HA ’s benign accuracy and defense success rate rapidly
converge as fine-tuning data amounts increase, with amounts higher
than 4% of the total dataset size (less than the training set of a single
client) providing almost no additional benefits.
6.5.2 When To Stop Fine-Tuning ? By default, we fine-tune with
CSFT for 100 epochs across our experiments. However, since the
defender cannot measure the ASR in practice to know when to stop
fine-tuning, we need to verify that our choice of the number of finetuning epochs is robust across defenses. To that end, we compute
the safe optimal epoch to stop at, i.e., the epoch that maximizes
benign accuracy while the ASR is below 50%. We compare the
safe optimal epoch to the peak epoch, which is the epoch with the
highest benign accuracy regardless of ASR. We display the results
in Table 7. We find that for all HA variants and for all numbers of

1

2

4

8

malicious clients, the safe and peak stopping epochs are exactly
the same. Hence, CSFT requires no surrogate metric or process to
determine when to stop fine-tuning; simply picking the epoch with
the highest benign accuracy is empirically optimal.

7

Related Work

The research community has recently shown a great interest in
federated learning backdoors, from attacks [2, 3, 5, 9, 12, 17, 18, 23,
24, 29, 34, 35, 44, 50, 56, 63, 64, 69, 71, 76, 77, 79–82] to defenses
[1, 4, 6, 8, 11, 13, 15, 16, 19, 22, 26, 30, 31, 33, 37, 40–42, 45–49, 51,
54, 55, 57, 60, 66–68, 72, 74, 75, 78], and surveys [10, 14, 32, 43, 58,
59, 62, 70].
Existing works [2, 18, 23, 24, 58, 69, 79] have focused on adversaries with limited capabilities, with at most complete control over
the weights they submit to the aggregator, and on other malicious
clients, if any exist [32]. Such adversaries help defenders estimate
their robustness against an average real-world adversary. Such estimates might not apply to a worst-case adversary. Also, they do
little for worst-case security and for studying the limits of backdoor
attacks and defenses, as we do in this work. Several works have
raised concerns about the inadequacy or mismatch to reality of
existing threat models [23, 24, 58], underpinning the relevance of
our full-information adaptive adversary threat model.
Adaptive attacks [23, 24, 53, 58] have recently emerged and have
been shown to be devastating. Attackers can leverage the disconnecting and reconnecting process to adapt to the defense used
by the aggregator [58], utilize defense metrics to adjust attack parameters [24], or adapt through multi-objective optimization [23].
Adaptive attacks have been shown to break existing state-of-the-art
defenses [23]. For poisoning attacks, a similar threat model to our
full-information adaptive adversary was studied, and it defeated all
Byzantine-robust aggregation methods evaluated [53]. Our work’s
empirical study extends their evaluation to backdoor attacks, considering also outlier detection, removal, and combined defenses. All
current adaptive attacks attack only single-typed defenses. Therefore, according to our theory, if well-formed, they must succeed (as
they do).
Few works study defenses against adaptive adversaries. MESAS
[23] considers strong adversaries that adapt via multi-objective
optimization; however, it does not use the benign updates that
our attacks leverage. As a defense, MESAS utilizes a plethora of

Fenaux et al.

Attack Success Rate vs. Fine-Tuning Size
Flame
Krum
Multi Metrics
ASR Threshold (50%)
One Client Data (5%)

ASR (%)

80
60
40

70
60

Accuracy (%)

100

Benign Accuracy vs. Fine-Tuning Size
80

50
40
30

Baseline (FT Data Only)
Flame
Krum
Multi Metrics
One Client Data (5%)

20

20

10

0
0

2

4

6

Fine-Tuning Dataset Size (%)

8

10

0

0

2

4

6

Fine-Tuning Dataset Size (%)

8

10

Figure 5: Impact of varying the Fine-Tuning (CSFT) dataset size on Attack Success Rate (left, 𝑚 = 8) and Benign Accuracy (right)
CSFT
for HACSFT
, HACSFT
Krum , and HAMulti-Metrics on CIFAR-10, alongside a baseline trained centrally solely on the fine-tuning subset,
Flame
averaged over five seeds. Dataset sizes are expressed as a percentage of the total training data. The vertical dotted line represents
the equivalent data held by a single local client (5%).
metrics derived from client updates to identify and discard malicious
updates, functioning similarly to Multi-Metrics [21]. Unfortunately,
MESAS’ code is not publicly available; however, if our theory of
backdoors is correct, one can defeat MESAS in a similar manner to
Multi-Metrics using our full-information adaptive adversary with
an optimization-based attack strategy, as we did in Section 5.4.

8

Conclusion

In this work, we propose Hammer and Anvil, a new theory of
backdoors in FL based on the expected update deviation 𝛿 of backdoor attacks. Our theory categorizes defenses into two types: the
Hammer (Type 2) and the Anvil (Type 1), based on whether they
defend against small or large deviation attacks. From our theory,
we derive that single-typed defenses and non-principled combined
defenses are exploitable. We empirically validate this hypothesis
under a new worst-case threat model: the full-information adaptive adversary, and we show that existing defenses are easily
broken, answering our first research question (RQ 1).
Our theory dictates the principled combination of defenses: combining Type 1 and Type 2 defenses to yield a robust principled combined defense, HA. We introduce a new Type 2 defense: ClippedSuper-Fine-Tuning (CSFT), and show that when combined with
existing Type 1 defenses, it can even defend against our worst-case
full-information adversary across a variety of data settings. We conjecture that combining specific Type 1 and Type 2 defenses yields
a robust defense against all backdoor attacks, and we provide empirical evidence to support this claim (tentatively answering RQ 2).
CSFT
Our best combined defenses, HACSFT
Flame and HAMulti-Metrics , are robust
against both our worst-case full-information adversary and existing
state-of-the-art attacks across all the data settings we evaluated.
Extending our theory to other fields of machine learning security,
such as adversarial robustness or watermarking, could introduce
new research avenues. We leave some aspects of adaptive attack
implementation and evaluation for future work. Additionally, future

research into better Type 1 and Type 2 defenses would directly
benefit our work, yielding even more robust combined defenses.
Finally, reproducing our results across other data modalities, such
as text or audio, could help further the understanding of federated
learning backdoor attacks and their defenses.

Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge the support of NSERC for grants RGPIN2023-03244, IRC-537591, the Government of Ontario and the Royal
Bank of Canada for funding this research. This paper was edited
for grammar using Grammarly.

References
[1] Eugene Bagdasaryan, Omid Poursaeed, and Vitaly Shmatikov. 2019. Differential
privacy has disparate impact on model accuracy. Advances in neural information
processing systems 32 (2019).
[2] Eugene Bagdasaryan, Andreas Veit, Yiqing Hua, Deborah Estrin, and Vitaly
Shmatikov. 2020. How to backdoor federated learning. In International conference
on artificial intelligence and statistics. PMLR, 2938–2948.
[3] Gilad Baruch, Moran Baruch, and Yoav Goldberg. 2019. A little is enough:
Circumventing defenses for distributed learning. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 32 (2019).
[4] Jeremy Bernstein, Jiawei Zhao, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, and Anima Anandkumar. 2018. signSGD with majority vote is communication efficient and fault
tolerant. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.05291 (2018).
[5] Arjun Nitin Bhagoji, Supriyo Chakraborty, Prateek Mittal, and Seraphin Calo.
2019. Analyzing federated learning through an adversarial lens. In International
conference on machine learning. PMLR, 634–643.
[6] Peva Blanchard, El Mahdi El Mhamdi, Rachid Guerraoui, and Julien Stainer.
2017. Machine learning with adversaries: Byzantine tolerant gradient descent.
Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017).
[7] John S Bridle. 1990. Probabilistic interpretation of feedforward classification
network outputs, with relationships to statistical pattern recognition. In Neurocomputing: Algorithms, architectures and applications. Springer, 227–236.
[8] Di Cao, Shan Chang, Zhijian Lin, Guohua Liu, and Donghong Sun. 2019. Understanding distributed poisoning attack in federated learning. In 2019 IEEE
25th international conference on parallel and distributed systems (ICPADS). IEEE,
233–239.
[9] Shan Chang, Ye Liu, Zhijian Lin, Hongzi Zhu, Bingzhu Zhu, and Cong Wang.
2024. Fedtrojan: Corrupting federated learning via zero-knowledge federated

Hammer and Anvil: Toward a Theory of Backdoors in Federated Learning

trojan attacks. In 2024 IEEE/ACM 32nd International Symposium on Quality of
Service (IWQoS). IEEE, 1–10.
[10] Qiuxian Chen and Yizheng Tao. 2023. An Investigation of Recent Backdoor Attacks and Defenses in Federated Learning. In 2023 Eighth International Conference
on Fog and Mobile Edge Computing (FMEC). IEEE, 262–269.
[11] Yudong Chen, Lili Su, and Jiaming Xu. 2017. Distributed statistical machine
learning in adversarial settings: Byzantine gradient descent. Proceedings of the
ACM on Measurement and Analysis of Computing Systems 1, 2 (2017), 1–25.
[12] Yanbo Dai and Songze Li. 2023. Chameleon: Adapting to peer images for planting
durable backdoors in federated learning. In International Conference on Machine
Learning. PMLR, 6712–6725.
[13] Pei Fang and Jinghui Chen. 2023. On the vulnerability of backdoor defenses for
federated learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
Vol. 37. 11800–11808.
[14] Yunhao Feng, Yanming Guo, Yinjian Hou, Yulun Wu, Mingrui Lao, Tianyuan Yu,
and Gang Liu. 2025. A survey of security threats in federated learning. Complex
& Intelligent Systems 11, 2 (2025), 1–26.
[15] Hossein Fereidooni, Alessandro Pegoraro, Phillip Rieger, Alexandra Dmitrienko,
and Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi. 2023. Freqfed: A frequency analysis-based approach for mitigating poisoning attacks in federated learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.04432 (2023).
[16] Clement Fung, Chris JM Yoon, and Ivan Beschastnikh. 2018. Mitigating sybils in
federated learning poisoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.04866 (2018).
[17] Xueluan Gong, Yanjiao Chen, Huayang Huang, Yuqing Liao, Shuai Wang, and
Qian Wang. 2022. Coordinated backdoor attacks against federated learning with
model-dependent triggers. IEEE network 36, 1 (2022), 84–90.
[18] Tianyu Gu, Kang Liu, Brendan Dolan-Gavitt, and Siddharth Garg. 2019. Badnets:
Evaluating backdooring attacks on deep neural networks. IEEE Access 7 (2019),
47230–47244.
[19] Rachid Guerraoui, Sébastien Rouault, et al. 2018. The hidden vulnerability of
distributed learning in byzantium. In International conference on machine learning.
PMLR, 3521–3530.
[20] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. 2016. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
[21] Siquan Huang, Yijiang Li, Chong Chen, Leyu Shi, and Ying Gao. 2023. Multimetrics adaptively identifies backdoors in federated learning. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. 4652–4662.
[22] Siquan Huang, Yijiang Li, Xingfu Yan, Ying Gao, Chong Chen, Leyu Shi, Biao
Chen, and Wing WY Ng. 2025. Scope: On Detecting Constrained Backdoor
Attacks in Federated Learning. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and
Security (2025).
[23] Torsten Krauß and Alexandra Dmitrienko. 2023. Mesas: Poisoning defense for
federated learning resilient against adaptive attackers. In Proceedings of the 2023
ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security. 1526–1540.
[24] Torsten Krauß, Jan König, Alexandra Dmitrienko, and Christian Kanzow. 2024.
Automatic adversarial adaption for stealthy poisoning attacks in federated learning. In To appear soon at the Network and Distributed System Security Symposium
(NDSS).
[25] Alex Krizhevsky. 2009. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
In Technical report.
[26] Kavita Kumari, Phillip Rieger, Hossein Fereidooni, Murtuza Jadliwala, and
Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi. 2023. Baybfed: Bayesian backdoor defense for federated
learning. In 2023 IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP). IEEE, 737–754.
[27] Yann LeCun. 1998. The mnist database of handwritten digits. In Technical report.
[28] Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. 2002. Gradientbased learning applied to document recognition. Proc. IEEE 86, 11 (2002), 2278–
2324.
[29] Haoyang Li, Qingqing Ye, Haibo Hu, Jin Li, Leixia Wang, Chengfang Fang, and
Jie Shi. 2023. 3dfed: Adaptive and extensible framework for covert backdoor
attack in federated learning. In 2023 IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP).
IEEE, 1893–1907.
[30] Minghui Li, Wei Wan, Yuxuan Ning, Shengshan Hu, Lulu Xue, Leo Yu Zhang, and
Yichen Wang. 2024. Darkfed: A data-free backdoor attack in federated learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.03299 (2024).
[31] Suyi Li, Yong Cheng, Wei Wang, Yang Liu, and Tianjian Chen. 2020. Learning to detect malicious clients for robust federated learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.00211 (2020).
[32] Zhaozheng Li, Jiahe Lan, Zheng Yan, and Erol Gelenbe. 2025. Backdoor attacks
and defense mechanisms in federated learning: A survey. Information Fusion
(2025), 103248.
[33] Kang Liu, Brendan Dolan-Gavitt, and Siddharth Garg. 2018. Fine-pruning: Defending against backdooring attacks on deep neural networks. In International
symposium on research in attacks, intrusions, and defenses. Springer, 273–294.
[34] Tian Liu, Xueyang Hu, and Tao Shu. 2023. Facilitating early-stage backdoor
attacks in federated learning with whole population distribution inference. IEEE
Internet of Things Journal 10, 12 (2023), 10385–10399.

[35] Tao Liu, Yuhang Zhang, Zhu Feng, Zhiqin Yang, Chen Xu, Dapeng Man, and Wu
Yang. 2024. Beyond traditional threats: A persistent backdoor attack on federated
learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 38.
21359–21367.
[36] Hidde Lycklama, Lukas Burkhalter, Alexander Viand, Nicolas Küchler, and Anwar
Hithnawi. 2023. Rofl: Robustness of secure federated learning. In 2023 IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, 453–476.
[37] Xiaoting Lyu, Yufei Han, Wei Wang, Jingkai Liu, Bin Wang, Jiqiang Liu, and
Xiangliang Zhang. 2023. Poisoning with cerberus: Stealthy and colluded backdoor
attack against federated learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 37. 9020–9028.
[38] Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and
Blaise Aguera y Arcas. 2017. Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial intelligence and statistics. PMLR,
1273–1282.
[39] Md Jueal Mia and M Hadi Amini. 2025. BART-FL: A Backdoor Attack-Resilient
Federated Aggregation Technique for Cross-Silo Applications. IEEE Transactions
on Machine Learning in Communications and Networking (2025).
[40] Stanislav Minsker. 2023. Efficient median of means estimator. In The Thirty Sixth
Annual Conference on Learning Theory. PMLR, 5925–5933.
[41] Luis Muñoz-González, Kenneth T Co, and Emil C Lupu. 2019. Byzantine-robust
federated machine learning through adaptive model averaging. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.05125 (2019).
[42] Thien Duc Nguyen, Samuel Marchal, Markus Miettinen, Hossein Fereidooni,
Nadarajah Asokan, and Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi. 2019. DÏoT: A federated selflearning anomaly detection system for IoT. In 2019 IEEE 39th International conference on distributed computing systems (ICDCS). IEEE, 756–767.
[43] Thuy Dung Nguyen, Tuan Nguyen, Phi Le Nguyen, Hieu H Pham, Khoa D Doan,
and Kok-Seng Wong. 2024. Backdoor attacks and defenses in federated learning:
Survey, challenges and future research directions. Engineering Applications of
Artificial Intelligence 127 (2024), 107166.
[44] Thuy Dung Nguyen, Tuan A Nguyen, Anh Tran, Khoa D Doan, and Kok-Seng
Wong. 2023. Iba: Towards irreversible backdoor attacks in federated learning.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023), 66364–66376.
[45] Thien Duc Nguyen, Phillip Rieger, Huili Chen, Hossein Yalame, Helen Möllering,
Hossein Fereidooni, Samuel Marchal, Markus Miettinen, Azalia Mirhoseini, Shaza
Zeitouni, et al. 2022. { FLAME } : Taming backdoors in federated learning. In 31st
USENIX security symposium (USENIX Security 22). 1415–1432.
[46] Mustafa Safa Ozdayi, Murat Kantarcioglu, and Yulia R Gel. 2021. Defending
against backdoors in federated learning with robust learning rate. In Proceedings
of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, Vol. 35. 9268–9276.
[47] Krishna Pillutla, Sham M Kakade, and Zaid Harchaoui. 2022. Robust aggregation
for federated learning. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing 70 (2022), 1142–
1154.
[48] Davy Preuveneers, Vera Rimmer, Ilias Tsingenopoulos, Jan Spooren, Wouter
Joosen, and Elisabeth Ilie-Zudor. 2018. Chained anomaly detection models for
federated learning: An intrusion detection case study. Applied Sciences 8, 12
(2018), 2663.
[49] Phillip Rieger, Thien Duc Nguyen, Markus Miettinen, and Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi.
2022. Deepsight: Mitigating backdoor attacks in federated learning through deep
model inspection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.00763 (2022).
[50] Ahmed Salem, Rui Wen, Michael Backes, Shiqing Ma, and Yang Zhang. 2022.
Dynamic backdoor attacks against machine learning models. In 2022 IEEE 7th
European Symposium on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P). IEEE, 703–718.
[51] Felix Sattler, Klaus-Robert Müller, Thomas Wiegand, and Wojciech Samek. 2020.
On the byzantine robustness of clustered federated learning. In ICASSP 2020-2020
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP).
IEEE, 8861–8865.
[52] Zeyang Sha, Xinlei He, Pascal Berrang, Mathias Humbert, and Yang Zhang.
2022. Fine-tuning is all you need to mitigate backdoor attacks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.09067 (2022).
[53] Virat Shejwalkar and Amir Houmansadr. 2021. Manipulating the byzantine:
Optimizing model poisoning attacks and defenses for federated learning. In
NDSS.
[54] Shiqi Shen, Shruti Tople, and Prateek Saxena. 2016. Auror: Defending against
poisoning attacks in collaborative deep learning systems. In Proceedings of the
32nd annual conference on computer security applications. 508–519.
[55] Jingwei Sun, Ang Li, Louis DiValentin, Amin Hassanzadeh, Yiran Chen, and
Hai Li. 2021. Fl-wbc: Enhancing robustness against model poisoning attacks
in federated learning from a client perspective. Advances in neural information
processing systems 34 (2021), 12613–12624.
[56] Yuwei Sun, Hideya Ochiai, and Jun Sakuma. 2022. Semi-targeted model poisoning
attack on federated learning via backward error analysis. In 2022 International
Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN). IEEE, 1–8.
[57] Ziteng Sun, Peter Kairouz, Ananda Theertha Suresh, and H Brendan McMahan.
2019. Can you really backdoor federated learning? arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.07963
(2019).

Fenaux et al.

[58] Jakub Kacper Szelag, Ji-Jian Chin, and Sook-Chin Yip. 2025. Adaptive Adversaries
in Byzantine-Robust Federated Learning: A survey. Cryptology ePrint Archive
(2025).
[59] Asadullah Tariq, Mohamed Adel Serhani, Farag M Sallabi, Ezedin S Barka, Tariq
Qayyum, Heba M Khater, and Khaled A Shuaib. 2024. Trustworthy federated
learning: A comprehensive review, architecture, key challenges, and future research prospects. IEEE Open Journal of the Communications Society (2024).
[60] Vale Tolpegin, Stacey Truex, Mehmet Emre Gursoy, and Ling Liu. 2020. Data
poisoning attacks against federated learning systems. In European symposium
on research in computer security. Springer, 480–501.
[61] Wei Wan, Yuxuan Ning, Zhicong Huang, Cheng Hong, Shengshan Hu, Ziqi
Zhou, Yechao Zhang, Tianqing Zhu, Wanlei Zhou, and Leo Yu Zhang. 2025.
Mars: A malignity-aware backdoor defense in federated learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2509.20383 (2025).
[62] Yichen Wan, Youyang Qu, Wei Ni, Yong Xiang, Longxiang Gao, and Ekram
Hossain. 2024. Data and model poisoning backdoor attacks on wireless federated learning, and the defense mechanisms: A comprehensive survey. IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials 26, 3 (2024), 1861–1897.
[63] Hongyi Wang, Kartik Sreenivasan, Shashank Rajput, Harit Vishwakarma,
Saurabh Agarwal, Jy-yong Sohn, Kangwook Lee, and Dimitris Papailiopoulos.
2020. Attack of the tails: Yes, you really can backdoor federated learning. Advances in neural information processing systems 33 (2020), 16070–16084.
[64] Junhan Wang, Zhangming Wu, Zhuoyue Wang, and Lu Dong. 2025. SBA: A Swift
and Stealthy Backdoor Attack Framework for Federated Learning. In ICASSP
2025-2025 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP). IEEE, 1–5.
[65] Ning Wang, Yang Xiao, Yimin Chen, Yang Hu, Wenjing Lou, and Y Thomas Hou.
2022. Flare: defending federated learning against model poisoning attacks via
latent space representations. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM on Asia Conference
on Computer and Communications Security. 946–958.
[66] Chen Wu, Xian Yang, Sencun Zhu, and Prasenjit Mitra. 2020. Mitigating backdoor
attacks in federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.01767 (2020).
[67] Chen Wu, Sencun Zhu, and Prasenjit Mitra. 2022. Federated unlearning with
knowledge distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.09441 (2022).
[68] Chulin Xie, Minghao Chen, Pin-Yu Chen, and Bo Li. 2021. Crfl: Certifiably
robust federated learning against backdoor attacks. In International conference
on machine learning. PMLR, 11372–11382.
[69] Chulin Xie, Keli Huang, Pin-Yu Chen, and Bo Li. 2019. Dba: Distributed backdoor attacks against federated learning. In International conference on learning
representations.
[70] Xianghua Xie, Chen Hu, Hanchi Ren, and Jingjing Deng. 2024. A survey on
vulnerability of federated learning: A learning algorithm perspective. Neurocomputing 573 (2024), 127225.
[71] Jing Xu, Rui Wang, Stefanos Koffas, Kaitai Liang, and Stjepan Picek. 2022. More
is better (mostly): On the backdoor attacks in federated graph neural networks.
In Proceedings of the 38th Annual Computer Security Applications Conference.
684–698.
[72] Jiahao Xu, Zikai Zhang, and Rui Hu. 2025. Detecting backdoor attacks in federated
learning via direction alignment inspection. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition Conference. 20654–20664.
[73] Jiahao Xu, Zikai Zhang, and Rui Hu. 2025. Identify backdoored model in federated learning via individual unlearning. In 2025 IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on
Applications of Computer Vision (WACV). IEEE, 7960–7969.
[74] Dong Yin, Yudong Chen, Ramchandran Kannan, and Peter Bartlett. 2018.
Byzantine-robust distributed learning: Towards optimal statistical rates. In International conference on machine learning. Pmlr, 5650–5659.
[75] Hao Yu, Chuan Ma, Meng Liu, Tianyu Du, Ming Ding, Tao Xiang, Shouling Ji,
and Xinwang Liu. 2023. G2 uardFL: Safeguarding Federated Learning Against
Backdoor Attacks through Attributed Client Graph Clustering. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.04984 (2023).
[76] Hangfan Zhang, Jinyuan Jia, Jinghui Chen, Lu Lin, and Dinghao Wu. 2023. A3fl:
Adversarially adaptive backdoor attacks to federated learning. Advances in neural
information processing systems 36 (2023), 61213–61233.
[77] Jiale Zhang, Bing Chen, Xiang Cheng, Huynh Thi Thanh Binh, and Shui Yu. 2020.
PoisonGAN: Generative poisoning attacks against federated learning in edge
computing systems. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 8, 5 (2020), 3310–3322.
[78] Zaixi Zhang, Xiaoyu Cao, Jinyuan Jia, and Neil Zhenqiang Gong. 2022. Fldetector:
Defending federated learning against model poisoning attacks via detecting
malicious clients. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD conference on knowledge
discovery and data mining. 2545–2555.
[79] Zhengming Zhang, Ashwinee Panda, Linyue Song, Yaoqing Yang, Michael Mahoney, Prateek Mittal, Ramchandran Kannan, and Joseph Gonzalez. 2022. Neurotoxin: Durable backdoors in federated learning. In International Conference on
Machine Learning. PMLR, 26429–26446.
[80] Zhendong Zhao, Xiaojun Chen, Yuexin Xuan, Ye Dong, Dakui Wang, and Kaitai
Liang. 2022. Defeat: Deep hidden feature backdoor attacks by imperceptible
perturbation and latent representation constraints. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF

Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 15213–15222.
[81] Xingchen Zhou, Ming Xu, Yiming Wu, and Ning Zheng. 2021. Deep model
poisoning attack on federated learning. Future Internet 13, 3 (2021), 73.
[82] Haomin Zhuang, Mingxian Yu, Hao Wang, Yang Hua, Jian Li, and Xu Yuan.
2023. Backdoor federated learning by poisoning backdoor-critical layers. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.04466 (2023).

A

Open Science

To reproduce our results, the following are necessary:
• The publicly available CIFAR-10 [25] and MNIST [27] datasets.
• Our codebase, available at the following anonymous link:
https://anonymous.4open.science/r/Hammer-and-Anvil-0C21/.
It contains detailed instructions and code to reproduce our
results, tables, and figures.

B

Ethics considerations

Our paper considers backdoor attacks and defenses against federated systems. While we propose a new, stronger attack, we also
propose a defense that prevents it, thereby mitigating its impact.
Our insights can also help further research into defenses against
backdoor attacks on federated systems. Our datasets, models, defenses, and attacks are public and do not contain sensitive or private
information. Our work did not use human subjects in any way.

