arXiv:2512.11760v1 [cs.LG] 12 Dec 2025

SpectralKrum: A Spectral-Geometric Defense
Against Byzantine Attacks in Federated Learning
Aditya Tripathi

Karan Sharma

Rahul Mishra

Tapas Kumar Maiti

DA-IICT
Gandhinagar, India
202318046@dau.ac.in

DA-IICT
Gandhinagar, India
202318018@dau.ac.in

IIT Patna
Patna, India
rahul mishra@iitp.ac.in

DA-IICT
Gandhinagar, India
tapas kumar@dau.ac.in

Abstract—Federated Learning (FL) distributes model training
across clients who retain their data locally, but this architecture
exposes a fundamental vulnerability: Byzantine clients can inject
arbitrarily corrupted updates that degrade or subvert the global
model. While robust aggregation methods (including Krum,
Bulyan, and coordinate-wise defenses) offer theoretical guarantees under idealized assumptions, their effectiveness erodes
substantially when client data distributions are heterogeneous
(non-IID) and adversaries can observe or approximate the
defense mechanism.
This paper introduces SpectralKrum, a defense that fuses
spectral subspace estimation with geometric neighbor-based selection. The core insight is that benign optimization trajectories, despite per-client heterogeneity, concentrate near a lowdimensional manifold that can be estimated from historical
aggregates. SpectralKrum projects incoming updates into this
learned subspace, applies Krum selection in the compressed
coordinates, and filters candidates whose orthogonal residual
energy exceeds a data-driven threshold. The method requires no
auxiliary data, operates entirely on model updates, and preserves
FL’s privacy properties.
We evaluate SpectralKrum against eight robust baselines
across seven attack scenarios on CIFAR-10 with Dirichletdistributed non-IID partitions (α = 0.1). Our experiments,
spanning over 56,000 training rounds, reveal a nuanced picture: SpectralKrum demonstrates competitive robustness against
directional and subspace-aware attacks (adaptive-steer, bufferdrift) but provides limited advantage over simpler statistical
methods under label-flip and min-max perturbations where malicious updates remain spectrally indistinguishable from benign
ones. Rather than claiming universal superiority, we characterize
precisely when spectral geometry aids Byzantine defense and
document failure modes that inform future research directions.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Federated Learning (FL) partitions model training across
a network of clients, each holding private data that never
leaves its device [12]. The server aggregates locally computed
updates (typically gradients or parameter deltas) to refine a
shared global model. This paradigm powers applications from
mobile keyboard prediction [21] to cross-institutional medical
imaging [22], but it introduces a critical security challenge:
the server cannot verify the provenance or correctness of any
individual update.
A Byzantine client, whether compromised by an adversary
or simply malfunctioning, may submit arbitrary vectors as
its contribution. With even a modest fraction of Byzantine
Code is available at: https://github.com/EdddTri/Spectral Krum

participants, naive averaging fails catastrophically: the global
model can diverge, suffer degraded accuracy, or acquire targeted backdoor behaviors that activate only on adversarychosen inputs.
A. The Geometric Problem Under Non-IID Data
Most robust aggregation guarantees assume that honest
clients’ updates cluster tightly around a shared mean. This
assumption rarely holds in practice [11]. Real FL deployments
exhibit pronounced data heterogeneity: a user’s smartphone
reflects their particular app usage patterns; a hospital’s imaging
data skews toward its regional patient demographics. Formally,
when client data follows a Dirichlet distribution with concentration α ≪ 1, individual clients may observe only a subset of
classes, producing gradients that point in legitimately different
directions.
This heterogeneity fundamentally complicates Byzantine
defense:
• Benign gradients spread across parameter space, potentially
spanning multiple distinct modes.
• Distance-based methods like Krum, designed to select the
update nearest its neighbors, may oscillate between benign
subgroups or mistake a centrally-positioned attack for the
honest consensus.
• Coordinate-wise defenses (trimmed mean, median) ignore
correlations between parameters, allowing adversaries to
craft perturbations that are small in each coordinate but large
in aggregate.
The geometric intuition behind classical defenses thus
breaks down precisely when it is most needed.
B. Spectral Structure as a Defense Signal
Despite this heterogeneity, FL optimization exhibits a remarkable regularity: aggregated updates from honest clients,
viewed across multiple rounds, trace a trajectory that lies
near a low-dimensional manifold [23]. The dominant principal
components of this trajectory capture directions of shared
descent, while noise and client-specific variation concentrate
in the residual subspace.
This observation suggests a complementary defense signal.
An update that deviates substantially from the historical subspace, measured by its orthogonal energy, is geometrically
anomalous, regardless of how close it may appear to any single

neighbor. Spectral methods like DnC-PMF exploit this insight,
but they remain vulnerable to adversaries who deliberately
project their malicious updates into the benign subspace,
matching the spectral signature while steering the model in
a harmful direction.
C. Contributions and Scope
We propose SpectralKrum, a defense that integrates spectral subspace estimation with Krum’s neighbor-based selection. The method:
1) Maintains a rolling buffer of past aggregated updates and
constructs a trimmed PCA subspace capturing benign optimization dynamics.
2) Projects incoming client updates into this subspace and
applies Krum selection in the compressed, low-dimensional
coordinates where benign clustering is tighter.
3) Filters the Krum-selected candidates using an orthogonal
energy threshold calibrated from the historical distribution
of residuals.
Crucially, SpectralKrum operates without access to client
data, labels, or any trusted root dataset, preserving FL’s core
privacy guarantees.
Our evaluation on CIFAR-10 with highly non-IID Dirichlet
partitions (α = 0.1) reveals both the promise and the limits
of this approach. SpectralKrum matches or exceeds baseline
robustness against directional attacks (sign-flip) and subspaceaware adversaries (adaptive-steer, buffer-drift) that introduce
detectable spectral anomalies. However, it provides no consistent advantage over simpler statistical aggregators when
malicious updates remain spectrally indistinguishable from
benign ones, as occurs with label-flip poisoning and carefully
calibrated min-max perturbations.
Rather than claiming a universal solution, we contribute:
• A principled algorithm combining spectral and geometric
robustness.
• A rigorous empirical study across seven attack families and
eight robust baselines.
• A characterization of when spectral defenses succeed, when
they fail, and what gaps remain for future work.
II. R ELATED W ORK
The challenge of robust aggregation in distributed learning
intersects several research threads: Byzantine-tolerant distributed optimization, robust statistics, adversarial machine
learning, and dimensionality reduction. We review these areas
with attention to how each informs, and where each falls short
of, the non-IID FL setting.
A. Byzantine-Tolerant Distributed Optimization
The theoretical foundations of Byzantine robustness trace to
distributed consensus problems, where the goal is to compute
a function of honest participants’ inputs despite arbitrary
failures. Lamport’s original formulation [1] established that
tolerating f Byzantine nodes requires at least 3f + 1 total
participants under certain communication models. In the ML
setting, the analogous question is whether robust gradient
descent can converge despite corrupted updates.

1) Coordinate-wise Aggregation: The simplest robust estimators operate independently on each parameter coordinate.
Coordinate Median [27] replaces averaging with the median;
Trimmed Mean [9] discards the largest and smallest fraction of
values before averaging. Both inherit the breakdown point [19]
of their scalar counterparts: they tolerate up to ⌊n/2⌋ − 1
adversarial values per coordinate. Recent work on robust mean
estimation [10] further refines these guarantees.
The limitation is fundamental. By treating coordinates independently, these methods ignore correlations in the gradient
structure. An adversary can construct an attack vector that
is small in every coordinate yet large in norm, escaping
coordinate-wise detection while significantly perturbing the
aggregate. Under non-IID conditions, this vulnerability is
amplified: legitimate coordinate-wise variation already approaches the detection threshold, leaving little margin for
filtering attacks.
2) Geometric
Median: The geometric median µ̂ =
P
arg minv i ∥v − di ∥2 provides a dimension-independent robustness guarantee [4] and is a natural choice when coordinate
independence is untenable. Weiszfeld’s algorithm [18] gives an
efficient iterative solution in most cases.
In practice, however, the geometric median suffers from
two drawbacks in FL. First, when benign updates form multiple clusters (as under non-IID data), the geometric median
converges to a “compromise” point that may represent no
client’s actual descent direction, slowing convergence. Second,
iterative computation is expensive for the high-dimensional
parameter vectors typical of modern neural networks.
3) Krum and Multi-Krum: Blanchard et al. [2] introduced
Krum as a selection-based alternative: rather than averaging,
choose the single update whose sum of distances to its
n − f − 2 nearest neighbors is smallest. The intuition is that
honest updates cluster, while Byzantine updates are isolated
or collusive outliers. Multi-Krum generalizes this by selecting
the top-k candidates and averaging them.
Krum’s guarantees assume tight benign clustering, precisely
the condition violated under non-IID data. When benign
updates spread across multiple modes, Krum may oscillate between modes or select an adversary positioned at the geometric
center of the dispersed benign set. Our experiments confirm
this instability: FullKrum achieves only 26–28% mean accuracy across attacks (Table II), worse than simple coordinate
medians.
4) Bulyan: Mhamdi et al. [3] proposed Bulyan as a twophase defense: iteratively apply Krum to select n − 2f
candidates, then apply coordinate-wise trimmed mean to the
selection. This composition inherits some robustness from both
components, but also their limitations: Krum’s sensitivity to
non-IID dispersion and trimmed mean’s coordinate independence. Bulyan additionally requires n ≥ 4f + 3 participants,
a constraint that may not hold in small cohorts.
B. Spectral and Subspace Methods
A distinct line of work observes that benign gradient
trajectories occupy a low-dimensional subspace, motivating

defenses that detect anomalies in spectral coordinates.
1) DnC-PMF and DnC-Cluster:
Shejwalkar and
Houmansadr [5] introduced Divide-and-Conquer defenses
that project updates into a PCA subspace, cluster them
(DnC-Cluster) or filter by projection magnitude (DnC-PMF),
and aggregate only the selected subset. These methods can
reject attacks that introduce variance orthogonal to the benign
subspace.
The vulnerability is equally clear: an adversary with knowledge of the subspace can project its malicious update into
that subspace, evading detection. Our adaptive-steer attack
explicitly implements this strategy, demonstrating that spectral
consistency alone is insufficient.
2) Historical Subspace Estimation: Rather than estimating
the subspace from the current round’s updates (which may
include adversaries), SpectralKrum uses a rolling buffer of
past aggregates, each presumably less contaminated because
it is itself the output of robust aggregation. This temporal
smoothing yields a more stable subspace estimate, though it
introduces latency: the subspace adapts slowly to legitimate
distributional shifts.
C. Model Poisoning and Backdoor Attacks
Byzantine attacks in FL fall into two broad categories. Untargeted (or model-poisoning) attacks aim to degrade overall
accuracy [8]; examples include sign-flip, where the adversary
submits −γ · g for honest gradient g, and min-max [6], where
the adversary computes the worst-case perturbation within the
benign variance envelope.
Targeted (or backdoor) attacks [7] seek to implant behavior
triggered by specific inputs while preserving accuracy on
clean data. A semantic backdoor embeds a visual trigger
(e.g., a pixel patch) in training images, relabeling them to a
chosen target class. Because the resulting gradient points in a
legitimately useful direction for the trigger distribution, it may
exhibit low orthogonal energy and evade spectral filters.
D. Defenses Requiring Trusted Data
Several recent defenses assume access to a small, clean
“root” dataset held by the server. FLTrust [13] computes a
trusted gradient on this root data and re-weights client updates
by their cosine similarity to the trusted direction. While
effective, this assumption is often impractical in cross-device
FL [20], where the server has no labeled data and acquiring
such data undermines the privacy motivation of federation.
SpectralKrum avoids this assumption entirely: it operates
solely on the model updates, requiring no auxiliary data or
labels.
E. Positioning SpectralKrum
Existing defenses each address part of the Byzantine problem:
• Coordinate-wise methods handle scalar outliers but ignore
directionality.
• Geometric methods (Krum, median) exploit clustering but
fail under non-IID dispersion.

Spectral methods detect orthogonal anomalies but succumb
to subspace-aware imitation.
SpectralKrum combines spectral projection (to tighten benign clustering and detect orthogonal anomalies) with Krum
selection (to exploit neighbor structure in the compressed
space). Our experiments test whether this combination yields
benefits beyond its components, and under what conditions it
does not.
•

III. M ETHOD : S PECTRAL K RUM
SpectralKrum addresses a fundamental tension in
Byzantine-robust FL: geometric defenses like Krum assume
tight clustering of honest updates, while spectral defenses
like DnC assume anomalies introduce orthogonal variance.
Neither assumption holds reliably under non-IID data with
sophisticated adversaries. Our approach combines both
signals: applying Krum in a learned spectral subspace where
clustering is tighter, while filtering by orthogonal energy to
catch updates that evade geometric selection.
A. Problem Setting
Each FL round, the server receives updates {di }ni=1 ⊂ Rd
from n clients, of which up to f may be Byzantine. The goal is
to compute an aggregate a that approximates the honest mean.
SpectralKrum achieves this through four stages: (1) estimate a
benign subspace from historical aggregates, (2) project current
updates into this subspace, (3) run Krum selection in the
compressed coordinates, and (4) filter by orthogonal energy
before averaging.
B. Historical Subspace Estimation
A key design choice in SpectralKrum is estimating the
benign subspace from past aggregates rather than currentround updates. Let B = {g (t−B+1) , . . . , g (t) } denote the
rolling buffer of the B most recent aggregated updates. Since
each g (·) is itself the output of robust aggregation, the buffer
is less contaminated than raw client submissions.
Stacking the buffer as X ∈ RB×d , we center by subtracting
the coordinate-wise mean (or median for additional robustness)
and trim rows by ℓ2 norm to reduce the influence of any
past aggregates that may have been adversarially biased.
Specifically, we discard the α-fraction of rows with the largest
and smallest norms, retaining the central (1 − 2α) fraction.
C. PCA Subspace Construction
On the trimmed, centered buffer Xk , we compute a rank-r
PCA [15]:
U = PCA(Xk , r) ∈ Rd×r ,

U ⊤ U = Ir .

The columns of U span the estimated benign subspace, and
P = U U ⊤ is the corresponding projection operator. The
trimming step follows robust estimation principles [14]. If the
buffer is too small (|Xk | < 2) or r exceeds the available rank,
we fall back to coordinate-wise median aggregation for that
round.

D. Orthogonal Energy and Threshold Calibration
For any update d, define its orthogonal energy as the norm
of its component outside the benign subspace:
⊤

ρ(d) = ∥d − U U d∥2 .
Intuitively, ρ(d) measures how much of d lies in directions
not captured by benign optimization history. We calibrate
a threshold τ as the q-th quantile (default q = 0.98) of
orthogonal energies computed over the buffer:

τ = quantileq {ρ(g (j) )}B
j=1 .
E. Projection and Selection
Given incoming updates {di }, we project each to spectral
coordinates zi = U ⊤ di ∈ Rr . In this compressed space, we
compute pairwise distances and apply Krum: select the k =
n − f − 2 updates whose sum of distances to their n − f − 2
nearest neighbors is smallest. Denote this set as S.
F. Krum in Spectral Coordinates
Instead of running Krum on full-dimensional updates, SpectralKrum applies Krum selection to the low-dimensional projections {zi }:
S = KrumSelect({zi }, f ).
In low dimensions, benign updates cluster more tightly,
adversarial directionality is suppressed, and distance computations avoid the pathologies of high-dimensional concentration [24]. Reliability depends on the accuracy of the learned
subspace and the adversary’s sophistication.

Algorithm 1 SpectralKrum Algorithm
1: Input: updates d1 , . . . , dn , buffer X, PCA dimension r,

trim fraction α, quantile q, Krum Byzantine parameter f
2: Output: aggregated update a
3: procedure B UILD S UBSPACE(X)
4:
if |X| = 0 then
5:
return (∅, 0)
6:
end if
7:
Center X using mean or median to get Xc

Compute norms ηt = ∥Xc,t ∥2
Trim α fraction to get Xk
if |Xk | < 2 then
return (∅, 0)
end if
Compute PCA with rank r to obtain basis U
14:
Compute residuals ρ(g (t) )
15:
τ ← quantileq (ρ)
16:
return (U, τ )
17: end procedure
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:

18: (U, τ ) ← B UILD S UBSPACE (X)
19: for i = 1 to n do

if U ̸= ∅ then
zi ← U ⊤ di
ρi ← ∥di − U zi ∥2
else
zi ← di
25:
ρi ← 0
26:
end if
27: end for
20:
21:
22:
23:
24:

G. Guard Filtering

28: S ← KrumSelect({zi }, f )

We filter S by orthogonal energy: G = {i ∈ S : ρ(di ) ≤ τ }.
If G becomes too small (e.g., attackers positioned themselves in subspace), we retain the minimal-residual candidates:
X
G = arg min
ρ(di ),

29: G ← {i ∈ S : ρi ≤ τ }
30: if |G| = 0 then
31:
G ← {arg mini ρi }
32: end if

T ⊆S
|T |=k i∈T

where k = guard min kept.
This fallback ensures aggregation continues even when
Krum selects suspicious candidates. Adaptive subspace-aware
adversaries may still construct updates whose orthogonal
energy lies within the benign threshold, limiting the filter’s
effectiveness.
H. Aggregation
Finally, compute:
a=

1 X
di .
|G|
i∈G

This aggregated update is appended to the buffer (evicting
the oldest entry), closing the loop.
I. Full Algorithm Pseudocode
J. Hyperparameter Analysis
Key hyperparameters:

1
33: a ← |G|

▷ fallback

▷ retain smallest residual

P

i∈G di

34: Append a to buffer X (evict oldest if needed)
35: return a

a) r (subspace dimension).: Larger r captures more
benign variation but reduces spectral contrast with malicious
updates. Range: 20 to 100 for CNNs.
b) B (buffer size).: Larger buffers improve stability but
slow adaptation. B = 50 balances these.
c) trim frac.: Trimming 5 to 15% of extremes stabilizes
PCA.
d) q (orthogonal energy quantile).: Higher q tightens the
guard. q = 0.98 works well.
e) warmup rounds.: Early rounds use median aggregation before enough history exists.
f) f byzantine.: Krum’s assumed adversary count.
K. Why SpectralKrum Works
SpectralKrum addresses existing weaknesses:

Non-IID drift: projection aligns benign updates in spectral
space.
• Directional attacks: spectral projection suppresses adversarial innovation directions.
• Subspace-aware attacks: orthogonal energy guard detects
spectral mimicry failures.
• Geometric stability: Krum benefits from reduced dimensionality.
However, adaptive adversaries can mimic both spectral coordinates and orthogonal energy profiles, limiting effectiveness.
This reveals fundamental limitations of spectral defenses.
•

C. Min-Max Attack
The min-max attack [6] maximizes deviation under norm
constraints from benign statistics. With µ and σ as the mean
and variance of benign updates:
dminmax = µ − cσ,
for constant c > 0. The attack stays within benign variation
range, often evading trimming and spectral guards.
This tests whether SpectralKrum can distinguish adversarial
updates operating entirely inside the benign subspace.

IV. ATTACK M ODEL AND A DVERSARIAL S TRATEGIES
Byzantine clients aim to corrupt the aggregated update. We
consider a strong adversary: up to f clients per round behave
arbitrarily, constrained only to submit vectors of the correct
dimensionality. Attacks may be adaptive (responding to the
defense) or agnostic (fixed manipulations).
We study two attack families:
• Classical model-poisoning: simple heuristics like sign-flip,
label-flip, min-max.
• Spectrally informed: attacks that exploit or mimic benign
spectral structure, challenging PCA-based defenses.
We also evaluate a semantic backdoor attack.
We adopt a standard Byzantine threat setting in which up to
f out of n clients per round are malicious. Malicious clients
may collude and share information, possess white-box access
to the global model, and attempt to reverse-engineer or estimate defense features such as PCA subspaces or orthogonalenergy thresholds; however, they do not have access to private
client data from benign users. The adversary’s goal varies by
attack type: maximizing global loss (untargeted poisoning),
forcing misclassification on certain classes (label-flip poisoning), implanting a targeted backdoor, steering the global model
along controlled adversarial directions, or evading spectral
and geometric outlier detection. SpectralKrum aims to provide
robustness against this broad range of adversaries, including
those that manipulate the spectral geometry of their updates.
We now describe each attack in detail.
A. Sign-Flip Attack
The simplest attack negates the benign gradient [28]: for
benign update b, submit d = −b. This disrupts naive averaging
and slows learning. Coordinate-wise defenses resist it, but
Krum can be destabilized under non-IID dispersion.
Sign-flip is a baseline, not a sophisticated attack.

D. Buffer-Drift Attack (Subspace-Aware)
This attack exploits SpectralKrum’s historical buffer X =
{g (1) , . . . , g (B) }. The adversary gradually shifts the PCA
subspace toward an adversarial direction by injecting small
perturbations:
(t)

dmal = b(t) + ϵ · vadv ,
where b(t) is the benign update, vadv is the adversarial
direction, and ϵ increases slowly. By keeping ϵ below τ ,
updates pass the guard while biasing the trajectory over time.
This challenges defenses relying on historical PCA structure.
E. Adaptive-Steer Attack (Subspace-Aware)
Adaptive-steer is the strongest attack in our suite and is
specifically crafted to exploit spectral defenses. It follows a
multi-step construction:
a) Step 1: Estimate the benign PCA subspace.: The
adversary computes or approximates the PCA basis Ub from
previously observed server broadcasts. Even partial or noisy
estimates suffice.
b) Step 2: Proposed malicious direction.: Let vadv denote
the intended poisoning direction (e.g., negative benign mean
direction or targeted class-steering direction).
c) Step 3: Projection into benign subspace.: Compute:
v∥ = Ub Ub⊤ vadv ,

v⊥ = vadv − v∥ .

d) Step 4: Orthogonal-energy matching.: Scale the orthogonal component to ensure it remains below the τ inferred
from historical benign residuals:

B. Label-Flip Attack
Malicious clients permute local labels [29] (e.g., y ← (y +
1) mod 10) and train normally. The resulting gradients deviate
from benign ones but may not produce large orthogonal
energy, since they can remain aligned with benign principal
components.
This attack tests spectral geometry limits: if malicious
updates lie within the benign subspace, spectral filtering fails.

′
v⊥
=

τ
v⊥ ,
∥v⊥ ∥2 + ϵ

where ϵ prevents division by zero.
e) Step 5: Final malicious update.: Construct:
′
dadv = v∥ + v⊥
.

f) Why this evades spectral defenses.: Because v∥ lies
′
inside the benign PCA subspace and v⊥
is carefully scaled to
imitate benign orthogonal energy, the malicious update:
appears spectrally consistent,
matches benign orthogonal-energy statistics,
• evades PCA filtering in DnC-PMF, DnC-Cluster, and others.
•
•

This attack inspired SpectralKrum’s guard mechanism,
which applies Krum selection after projection and orthogonal
energy filtering in the original space, combining geometric and
spectral checks.
F. Semantic Backdoor Attack
Backdoor attacks modify behavior only on inputs with a
trigger pattern. An adversary inserts trigger patches into local
training images, relabels them to a target class, and trains
gradients that associate trigger with target.
This is realistic for edge-device FL (e.g., stickers in phone
images). Backdoors challenge aggregation defenses because
gradients remain low-norm, orthogonal energy stays small, and
the attack is task-specific rather than purely directional.
SpectralKrum provides partial resilience through geometric
filtering but backdoors remain difficult.
G. Why We Omit the Full DnC Attack
The original DnC attack [5] requires high coordination:
malicious updates must be jointly optimized to form coherent
clusters that confuse clustering-based detection. This needs
synchronized adversaries, iterative optimization, and shared
gradients, which is unrealistic for cross-device FL.
We instead evaluate a subspace-inspired stress-test capturing
the key spectral properties: projection into benign subspace,
orthogonal energy matching, and directional steering. This
preserves the relevant geometric structure for evaluating SpectralKrum and DnC variants. Extending evaluation to the full
DnC attack is an important direction for future research.
H. Summary of Attack Suite
We summarize all attacks and their properties in Table I.
TABLE I: Summary of Attacks Evaluated
Attack

Description / Key Property

sign-flip

Negates benign gradient; high-norm, high
variance
Trains on corrupted labels; small orthogonal energy
Worst-case variance-based perturbation
Steers PCA subspace over time
Subspace-aware,
orthogonal-energymatched
Trigger-based targeted misclassification
Baseline for comparison

label-flip
min-max
buffer-drift
adaptive-steer
semantic backdoor
none (reference)

The diversity of this suite ensures that SpectralKrum is evaluated under classical, directional, spectral, and task-specific
adversarial conditions.

V. E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
This section details our evaluation environment, including datasets, model architectures, client sampling, non-IID
partitioning, baselines, attacks, metrics, and implementation
details. Our setup is designed to stress-test SpectralKrum under
realistic and adversarial FL conditions.
A. Datasets
We use CIFAR-10 [16] (60,000 images, 10 classes), standard in FL research for its moderate difficulty and suitability
for both shallow and deep models.
We partition data across N = 100 clients using Dirichlet
sampling [17] with α = 0.1, creating highly skewed distributions where some clients see only a few classes. This non-IID
setting amplifies geometric instability in benign gradients and
stresses clustering-based defenses.
B. Client Sampling
Each round samples n = 10 clients uniformly without
replacement from 100 total. Up to f ≤ 3 may be Byzantine,
representing typical cross-device FL.
C. Model Architecture
We use a lightweight CNN (TinyCNN) with two convolutional layers, max-pooling, and two fully connected layers.
This architecture serves as a fast proxy for edge-device training
while producing parameter vectors of moderate dimension
(d ≈ 104 ), sufficient to stress geometric and spectral defenses
without the computational overhead of larger models.
D. Baselines
We compare against:
Trimmed Mean: discards extreme coordinates.
• Coordinate Median: robust coordinate-wise estimator.
• Geometric Median: robust vector aggregation.
• FullKrum: classical single-update selection.
• MultiKrum: multi-update selection then averaging.
• Bulyan: iterated Krum with trimming.
• DnC-PMF: spectral divide-and-conquer with mixture filtering.
• DnC-Cluster: spectral clustering before aggregation.
These span coordinate-wise, geometric, and spectral defense
philosophies.
•

E. Hyperparameter Configuration
SpectralKrum defaults:
• PCA dimension r = 50.
• Buffer size B = 50.
• Centering: mean.
• Trim mode: two-sided.
• Trim fraction: 0.1.
• Warmup rounds: 3.
• PCA refresh interval: 1.
• Orthogonal-energy quantile: q = 0.98.
• Minimum guard survivors: 1.
• Krum parameter f : assumed number of Byzantine clients.

These values are derived from empirical stability tests and
provide a robust balance between PCA estimation quality and
computational efficiency.
F. Training Procedure
Clients perform E = 1 or E = 2 local epochs with minibatch SGD [25] (learning rate 0.01, weight decay 5×10−4 ) and
data augmentation (random crop, horizontal flip) for benign
clients. Malicious clients modify training or updates per attack.

B. Adaptive-Steer (accuracy curve)
Adaptive-steer is a subspace-aware attack that tries to remain spectrally consistent with benign updates while steering
the global model. The accuracy curve in Figure 1 shows
how different defenses evolve over time under this attack
(attacker count = 2).

G. Evaluation Metrics
Per-Round Accuracy: global model accuracy during training.
PT
AUC: T1 t=1 Acc(t), measuring stability across rounds.
Best/Final Accuracy: peak and convergence accuracy.
Computation Overhead: PCA, projection, Krum, and
guard filtering times.
H. Implementation Details
SpectralKrum is implemented in Python with NumPy and
scikit-learn [26]. Experiments run on an NVIDIA RTX 4090
GPU (training) and CPU (aggregation). PCA overhead is
negligible relative to forward/backward passes. We use fixed
random seeds for reproducibility.
I. Summary
Our setup evaluates SpectralKrum under highly non-IID
data, diverse attacks, strong adversaries, and eight robust
baselines.
VI. R ESULTS
We evaluate SpectralKrum across seven adversarial settings
and nine aggregation methods (eight baselines plus SpectralKrum). Our focus is on understanding robustness under
challenging scenarios, especially when benign gradients are
non-IID and adversarial updates intentionally exploit spectral
structure.
We present a compact AUC summary (mean accuracy across
rounds) to rank defenses, followed by per-attack accuracy
curves that illustrate the temporal behavior underlying those
summary scores. For backdoor attacks we also discuss attack
success dynamics qualitatively.
A. AUC summary (mean accuracy across rounds)
Table II reports the mean accuracy across rounds (an AUClike summary) at attacker count = 2 for each (algorithm,
attack) pair. These values are computed by averaging accuracy
across training rounds and then averaging across experimental repeats and seeds. Higher values indicate better average
robustness during training.
The table provides a concise ranking: methods such as
GeometricMedian, MultiKrum, DnC-PMF, and TrimmedMean
achieve high average accuracy across many attacks, while
FullKrum consistently yields low accuracy for these non-IID
settings. However, averages obscure temporal dynamics: the
following subsections show round-by-round accuracy curves
that reveal stability, oscillation, and convergence behavior that
explain the AUC scores.

Fig. 1: Accuracy across rounds under adaptive steer (attacker count = 2).
From the curve we observe that SpectralKrum and DnCPMF / MultiKrum achieve higher accuracy quickly and remain
relatively stable, whereas methods such as FullKrum and
DnC-Cluster show pronounced oscillation or persistently lower
accuracy. This temporal pattern aligns with the AUC entries
in Table II.
C. Buffer-Drift (accuracy curve)

Fig. 2: Accuracy across rounds under buffer drift (attacker count = 2).
Buffer-drift targets the historical PCA buffer and attempts
gradual subspace manipulation. The curves show that GeometricMedian, TrimmedMean, and several median-like aggregators remain robust and converge to high accuracy. Krum-based
variants that do not leverage robust spectral filtering (e.g.,

TABLE II: Mean accuracy across rounds (AUC-like) at attacker count = 2. (Each cell is the mean accuracy across rounds for
the given (algorithm, attack) pair.)
Algorithm

adaptive steer

buffer drift

label flip

min max

none

semantic backdoor

sign flip

Grand Total

Bulyan
CoordMedian
DnC-Cluster
DnC-PMF
FullKrum
GeometricMedian
MultiKrum
SpectralKrum
TrimmedMean

40.7727
35.7364
24.7427
51.1427
26.3655
39.5818
50.9555
49.7164
45.2473

33.7527
44.8918
47.1036
49.8391
27.3945
54.6645
47.4682
47.5145
53.1673

37.2818
47.7245
50.3664
50.4727
27.2727
57.1027
50.4355
38.9818
55.7927

41.4727
45.4373
47.1200
50.8836
26.4182
56.4127
50.8391
48.7055
51.7682

38.9691
47.9509
46.5409
51.6400
26.7818
57.8000
51.6655
44.4955
55.1891

42.5200
48.4664
52.4809
51.1864
27.8309
57.5309
50.6691
47.1764
55.4691

41.3651
43.5873
19.7309
50.9018
26.3891
52.0718
50.8864
49.7318
49.0585

39.4596
44.8273
39.7654
50.8673
26.3793
53.1380
50.4170
46.4317
52.3549

Grand Total (mean over algos)

41.6739

45.0885

46.2052

48.5798

46.7258

48.1478

41.6505

47.6238

FullKrum) lag behind. SpectralKrum tracks the top performers
closely, illustrating its temporal resilience to drift.

E. Min-Max (accuracy curve)

D. Label-Flip (accuracy curve)

Fig. 3: Accuracy across rounds under label flip (attacker count = 2).

Label-flip poisoning changes local labels and therefore
injects semantically meaningful but spectrally subtle gradients.
Many coordinate-robust or median-based methods (TrimmedMean, GeometricMedian) obtain strong final accuracy because
their coordinate-level robustness mitigates systematic label
noise. SpectralKrum performs well on average but is less
dominant here because label-flip updates can remain largely
inside the benign subspace, reducing the orthogonal-energy
signal.

Fig. 4: Accuracy across rounds under min max (attacker count = 2).

The min-max attacker attempts worst-case perturbations
within benign variation. Accuracy curves show that spectral
defenses offer modest advantage, but the attack remains hard
to detect solely via orthogonal energy. DnC-PMF, MultiKrum,
and trimmed/median methods remain highly competitive.

F. Semantic Backdoor (accuracy curve)

H. Computational Overhead
Table III reports the measured mean total computation time
per training round for each aggregation rule. These values were
collected under identical hardware and software conditions
and therefore provide a fair comparison of relative cost across
methods.
TABLE III: Mean total computation time per round for each
aggregation rule.

Fig. 5: Accuracy across rounds under semantic backdoor
(attacker count = 2).
Backdoor attacks produce gradients targeted toward a
trigger-based task manipulation and often exhibit low orthogonal energy. Consequently, most aggregation-only defenses,
including SpectralKrum, reduce but do not fully eliminate
backdoor ASR. The AUC table highlights which defenses
maintain high overall accuracy in the presence of backdoor
clients, while Figure 5 shows that some defenses converge
more smoothly than others.
G. Sign-Flip (accuracy curve)

Aggregation Rule

Mean Time (ms)

FullKrum
MultiKrum
CoordMedian
GeometricMedian
DnC-PMF
DnC-Cluster
Bulyan
TrimmedMean
SpectralKrum

7.111224
8.240192
29.384039
76.383777
167.312114
368.234553
401.891775
406.241334
1311.667696

Krum-based methods introduce modest overhead from distance computations. Median-based approaches (CoordMedian,
GeometricMedian) are significantly more expensive. DnCstyle methods incur very high costs due to clustering or matrix
factorization. SpectralKrum is the most expensive because
each round performs PCA-based subspace construction, projection, and orthogonal-energy filtering, but the cost remains
practical in server-side federated learning deployments.
VII. D ISCUSSION
The experimental results paint a nuanced picture that resists
simple conclusions. SpectralKrum neither dominates existing
methods nor fails completely; its effectiveness depends critically on the attack’s geometric signature.
A. When Spectral Geometry Helps
SpectralKrum performs competitively against attacks that
introduce detectable spectral anomalies. Under adaptive-steer
and buffer-drift, SpectralKrum matches or exceeds DnC-PMF
and MultiKrum. Even subspace-aware adversaries often introduce residual orthogonal energy from imperfect subspace
estimation or inherent attack constraints.
B. When Spectral Geometry Fails

Fig. 6: Accuracy across rounds under sign flip (attacker count
= 2).
Sign-flip is a high-magnitude but geometrically simple
untargeted attack, and most robust aggregation rules detect
it effectively. Methods such as GeometricMedian, MultiKrum,
TrimmedMean, DnC-PMF, and SpectralKrum rise steadily to
high accuracy, whereas cluster-based defenses such as DnCCluster collapse early and remain stuck at chance level. Spectral projection helps stabilize variance, and in combination
with median-style robustness keeps the global model accurate
despite the attack.

Label-flip and min-max attacks produce gradients that
remain within the benign subspace. Their malicious effect
comes from direction, not orthogonal deviation. Against such
attacks, SpectralKrum’s guard provides no signal. Table II
shows GeometricMedian and TrimmedMean outperforming
SpectralKrum on label-flip by substantial margins. Coordinatewise methods succeed because they aggregate each parameter
independently, diluting systematic perturbations.
C. The Semantic Gap
Semantic backdoors present an even deeper challenge:
their gradients are geometrically indistinguishable from benign training on a modified distribution. No aggregationonly defense can fully neutralize well-crafted backdoors. This

suggests robust FL requires layered defenses: gradient-level
filtering for geometric anomalies combined with activationlevel analysis for semantic manipulations.
D. Limitations
Several directions emerge:
a) Robust or Incremental PCA.: Under non-IID conditions, standard PCA becomes unstable. Robust PCA or
streaming variants could maintain cleaner subspace estimates.
b) Adaptive Rank Selection.: Automatically choosing
PCA dimension r based on eigengaps or variance retention
may prevent underfitting or overfitting the spectral subspace.
c) Hybrid Spectral-Median Aggregation.: Coordinatewise statistics (Trimmed Mean, Geometric Median) outperform spectral filters on label-flip and min-max. A hybrid
combining spectral projection with coordinate-wise median
may inherit complementary strengths.
d) Layer-wise SpectralKrum.: Deep networks have heterogeneous layers with different geometric structures. Layerwise or multi-subspace PCA may capture richer variation.
Our evaluation has inherent limitations. We tested only
CIFAR-10 with a TinyCNN; real deployments involve diverse modalities where gradient spectral structure may differ
substantially. We evaluated fixed adversary fractions (f ≤ 3
of n = 10); higher fractions and larger pools could reveal
different dynamics. Our adversaries are static; fully adaptive
adversaries tracking the server’s PCA in real-time might defeat
SpectralKrum more effectively.
VIII. C ONCLUSION
SpectralKrum combines spectral subspace estimation with
Krum’s geometric selection, aiming to exploit the lowdimensional structure of benign FL trajectories while filtering
spectrally anomalous updates. Our extensive evaluation across
seven attack families and eight robust baselines reveals a
clear pattern: spectral defenses help when attacks introduce
orthogonal variance but provide no advantage when malicious
gradients lie within the benign subspace.
This finding has broader implications for Byzantine-robust
FL. No single defense philosophy (coordinate-wise, geometric,
or spectral) addresses all attack families. The path forward
likely involves hybrid architectures that combine complementary signals, perhaps applying spectral filtering to detect
geometric anomalies while using activation-level analysis for
semantic attacks that evade gradient-based detection.
We release our code and experimental logs to facilitate
reproducibility and encourage further investigation into the
interplay between spectral structure and Byzantine robustness
in federated optimization.
R EFERENCES
[1] L. Lamport, R. Shostak, and M. Pease, “The Byzantine Generals
Problem,” ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems,
vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 382–401, 1982.
[2] P. Blanchard, E. El Mhamdi, R. Guerraoui, and J. Stainer, “Machine
learning with adversaries: Byzantine tolerant gradient descent,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2017.

[3] E. El Mhamdi, R. Guerraoui, and S. Rouault, “The hidden vulnerability
of distributed learning in Byzantium,” International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.
[4] L. Chen, H. Xu, and J. Xu, “Distributed statistical machine learning
in adversarial settings,” International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), 2017.
[5] V. Shejwalkar and A. Houmansadr, “Byzantine-robust federated learning
via adversarially-robust clustering,” International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
[6] M. Fang, X. Cao, J. Jia, and N. Gong, “Local model poisoning attacks
to Byzantine-robust federated learning,” USENIX Security, 2020.
[7] E. Bagdasaryan, A. Veit, Y. Hua, D. Estrin, and V. Shmatikov, “How
to backdoor federated learning,” International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), 2020.
[8] Z. Sun, P. Kairouz, A. T. Suresh, and H. B. McMahan, “Can you really
backdoor federated learning?,” arXiv:1911.07963, 2019.
[9] D. Yin, Y. Chen, R. Kannan, and P. Bartlett, “Byzantine-robust distributed learning: Towards optimal statistical rates,” International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.
[10] K. Pillutla, Y. Xu, and S. Kakade, “Robust aggregation for federated
learning via median-of-means,” NeurIPS, 2022.
[11] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, M. Zaheer, M. Sanjabi, A. Talwalkar, and V. Smith,
“Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks,” Proceedings of
Machine Learning and Systems (MLSys), 2020.
[12] H. Brendan McMahan et al., “Communication-efficient learning of deep
networks from decentralized data,” AISTATS, 2017.
[13] X. Cao, M. Fang, J. Liu, and N. Z. Gong, “FLTrust: Byzantine-robust
Federated Learning via Trust Bootstrapping,” Network and Distributed
System Security Symposium (NDSS), 2021.
[14] D. F. Andrews, “A robust method for multiple linear regression,”
Technometrics, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 523–531, 1974.
[15] I. Johnstone, “On the distribution of the largest eigenvalue in principal
component analysis,” Annals of Statistics, 2001.
[16] A. Krizhevsky, “Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images,”
Technical Report, University of Toronto, 2009.
[17] T.-M. H. Hsu, H. Qi, and M. Brown, “Measuring the effects of
non-identical data distribution for federated visual classification,”
arXiv:1909.06335, 2019.
[18] E. Weiszfeld, “Sur le point pour lequel la somme des distances de n
points donnés est minimum,” Tohoku Mathematical Journal, vol. 43,
pp. 355–386, 1937.
[19] D. L. Donoho and P. J. Huber, “The notion of breakdown point,” in A
Festschrift for Erich L. Lehmann, Wadsworth, pp. 157–184, 1983.
[20] P. Kairouz et al., “Advances and open problems in federated learning,”
Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, vol. 14, no. 1–2, pp. 1–
210, 2021.
[21] A. Hard et al., “Federated learning for mobile keyboard prediction,”
arXiv:1811.03604, 2018.
[22] N. Rieke et al., “The future of digital health with federated learning,”
NPJ Digital Medicine, vol. 3, no. 119, 2020.
[23] C. Li, H. Farkhoor, R. Liu, and J. Yosinski, “Measuring the intrinsic dimension of objective landscapes,” International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2018.
[24] K. Beyer, J. Goldstein, R. Ramakrishnan, and U. Shaft, “When is
‘nearest neighbor’ meaningful?,” International Conference on Database
Theory (ICDT), pp. 217–235, 1999.
[25] L. Bottou, “Large-scale machine learning with stochastic gradient descent,” International Conference on Computational Statistics (COMPSTAT), pp. 177–186, 2010.
[26] F. Pedregosa et al., “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python,” Journal
of Machine Learning Research, vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, 2011.
[27] J. W. Tukey, “A survey of sampling from contaminated distributions,”
in Contributions to Probability and Statistics, Stanford University Press,
pp. 448–485, 1960.
[28] Z. Allen-Zhu, F. Li, J. Li, and Y. Zhu, “Byzantine-resilient non-convex
stochastic gradient descent,” International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2021.
[29] B. Biggio, B. Nelson, and P. Laskov, “Poisoning attacks against support vector machines,” International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), pp. 1467–1474, 2012.

