1

SecureDyn-FL: A Robust Privacy-Preserving
Federated Learning Framework for Intrusion
Detection in IoT Networks

arXiv:2601.06466v1 [cs.CR] 10 Jan 2026

Imtiaz Ali Soomro ID , Hamood Ur Rehman ID , Syed Jawad Hussain ID , Adeel Iqbal ID , Waqas Khalid ID , and
Heejung Yu ID

Abstract—The rapid proliferation of Internet of Things
(IoT) devices across domains such as smart homes, industrial
control systems, and healthcare networks has significantly
expanded the attack surface for cyber threats, including
botnet-driven distributed denial-of-service (DDoS), malware
injection, and data exfiltration. Conventional intrusion detection systems (IDS) face critical challenges like privacy, scalability, and robustness when applied in such heterogeneous IoT
environments. To address these issues, we propose SecureDynFL, a comprehensive and robust privacy-preserving federated
learning (FL) framework tailored for intrusion detection in
IoT networks. SecureDyn-FL is designed to simultaneously
address multiple security dimensions in FL-based IDS: (1)
poisoning detection through dynamic temporal gradient auditing, (2) privacy protection against inference and eavesdropping attacks through secure aggregation, and (3) adaptation
to heterogeneous non-independent-and-identically-distributed
(non-IID) data via personalized learning. The framework
introduces three core contributions: (i) a dynamic temporal
gradient auditing mechanism that leverages Gaussian mixture
models (GMMs) and Mahalanobis distance (MD) to detect
stealthy and adaptive poisoning attacks, (ii) an optimized
privacy-preserving aggregation scheme based on transformed
additive ElGamal encryption with adaptive pruning and
quantization for secure and efficient communication, and (iii)
a dual-objective personalized learning strategy that improves
model adaptation under non-IID data using logit-adjusted
loss. Extensive experiments on the N-BaIoT dataset under
both IID and non-IID settings, including scenarios with up
to 50% adversarial clients, demonstrate that SecureDynFL consistently outperforms state-of-the-art FL-based IDS
defenses. It achieves up to 99.01% detection accuracy, a
98.9% F1-score, and significantly reduced attack success rates
across diverse poisoning attacks, while maintaining strong
privacy guarantees and computational efficiency for resourceconstrained IoT devices.
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of
Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (RS-202500514779, RS-2025-02303435), by the Information Technology Research
Center (ITRC) support program (IITP-2023-RS-2022-00164800) supervised by the Institute for Information & Communications Technology
Planning & Evaluation (IITP). (Imtiaz Ali Soomro and Adeel Iqbal
contributed equally to this work.). (Corresponding authors: Heejung Yu
and Waqas Khalid).
I. A. Somroo, and S. J. Hussain are with Sir Syed CASE Institute
of Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan (email: imtiaz.soomro@case.edu.pk,
jawad.hussain@case.edu.pk).
H. Khan is with the ECE Department, Habib University, Karachi,
Pakistan (email: hamood.rehman@sse.habib.edu.pk).
A. Iqbal is with the School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Yeunganam University, South Korea (email:adeeliqbal@yu.ac.kr).
Waqas Khalid is with the Department of Electrical and Electronic
Engineering, and the Next Generation Internet of Everything Laboratory
(NGIoE Lab), University of Nottingham Ningbo China, Ningbo 315100,
China (e-mail: Waqas.Khalid@nottingham.edu.cn).
Heejung Yu is with the Department of Electronics and Information
Engineering, Korea University, Sejong, 30019, South Korea (email: heejungyu@korea.ac.kr).

Index Terms—Security threats, Intrusion Detection System
(IDS), Federated learning (FL).

I. I NTRODUCTION
The rapid expansion of the Internet has driven largescale connectivity, accelerating the deployment of Internet
of Things (IoT) devices [1]–[6]. By 2025, IoT devices
are expected to exceed 55.7 billion globally [7]. Smart
appliances and sensors produce massive data streams but
have limited computing power and minimal security [8].
These vulnerabilities make them attractive targets for cyber
adversaries, as illustrated by the 2016 Mirai botnet attack
[9], which remains one of the most severe IoT security
incidents. Such events highlight the need for effective
IoT-specific cybersecurity measures. Intrusion Detection
Systems (IDS), which analyze network traffic to identify
threats, are essential components for IoT defense [10].
Federated Learning (FL) offers a promising paradigm for
addressing the privacy and scalability limitations of centralized IDS [11]. In FL, clients collaboratively train a shared
model without exchanging raw data. Clients compute local
updates that are aggregated by a central server to form
a global model. This iterative process preserves privacy,
reduces communication overhead, and supports distributed
intrusion detection [12]. Recent FL-based IDS frameworks
[13], [14] leverage this approach to enhance scalability and
privacy.
Despite these advantages, several deployment challenges
remain. IoT environments typically exhibit nonindependent-and-identically-distributed (non-IID) data,
with clients receiving heterogeneous mixes of benign
and malicious traffic. Such heterogeneity degrades global
convergence and detection performance [12], [15], [16].
FL is also vulnerable to poisoning attacks: compromised
clients can inject malicious updates to bias or degrade the
global model [17], [18]. The lack of client supervision
amplifies these threats [19], [20]. Adversaries can further
exploit eavesdropping or man-in-the-middle (MITM)
attacks [21], [22] to reconstruct local models and conduct
inference attacks [23]–[25]. Gradient manipulation
techniques can bypass traditional defenses [26].
Privacy-preserving techniques such as differential privacy (DP), secure multiparty computation (SMC), and
homomorphic encryption (HE) have been proposed to
mitigate these threats [27], [28]. DP-based methods [29],
[30] inject noise to protect data but often degrade accuracy
in dynamic or imbalanced settings. SMC approaches [31]
prevent data leakage but incur heavy computational and

2

communication costs, unsuitable for constrained devices.
HE frameworks [32] ensure confidentiality but increase
latency. Hybrid solutions [33]–[35] aim to balance privacy
and performance but face trade-offs. Frameworks such as
TrustFL [36] and SafeFL [37] advance the field but have
practical limitations: TrustFL depends on trusted execution
environments (TEEs), and SafeFL incurs high computational overhead. Many poisoning defenses require gradient
access, which risks data leakage, and existing methods
struggle against encrypted poisoning attacks.
These limitations can be summarized as: (i) vulnerability
to poisoning and inference attacks, (ii) poor adaptation
to non-IID data and limited generalization to unseen intrusions, and (iii) communication inefficiencies unsuitable
for resource-constrained devices. While recent zero-shot
learning (ZSL) advances [38] offer promising techniques
for generalization, further progress is needed to address
these issues holistically.
This paper proposes SecureDyn-FL, a privacy-preserving
FL-based IDS tailored for heterogeneous IoT environments. SecureDyn-FL addresses three core challenges: data
heterogeneity, poisoning resilience, and communication
security. A model decoupling strategy separates shared
feature extraction from personalized classification, allowing
local adaptation while maintaining global robustness. A
joint mini-batch logit-adjusted and cross-entropy loss improves learning under diverse distributions. Unlike standard
aggregation methods, which are vulnerable to label-flipping
and model poisoning [39], [40], SecureDyn-FL maintains
stable convergence under heterogeneous and adversarial
conditions.
SecureDyn-FL ensures secure communication by integrating homomorphic encryption with efficient privacypreserving mechanisms. This design enables encrypted
computation without compromising computational efficiency, thereby safeguarding both model parameters and
sensitive data throughout the training process. The framework is engineered for real-world deployment, delivering
strong security guarantees, robustness against adversarial
behavior, and scalability across large-scale distributed environments.
The main contributions are:
• Proposing SecureDyn-FL, integrating dynamic auditing, encryption, and personalization to address heterogeneity, poisoning, and communication security in
FL-based IDS.
• Developing a Gaussian mixture model (GMM)based auditing mechanism using Mahalanobis distance (MD) to detect stealthy and adaptive poisoning
attacks.
• Designing a hybrid loss function that improves local
adaptation and global performance.
• Applying dynamic pruning and quantization to reduce
communication overhead without degrading accuracy
or privacy.
• Demonstrating strong cross-dataset generalization,
maintaining high performance across N-BaIoT, and
T ONIoT benchmarks.
• Achieving up to 99.01% overall accuracy and a 0.9893
F1-score on N-BaIoT under same-model poisoning,
while maintaining strong robustness across all at-

tack settings, consistently outperforming state-of-theart defenses such as FL Trust, Shield FL, and FLDefender.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section II presents the problem formulation and threat model.
Section III discusses the necessary background and related
concepts. Section IV introduces the overall SecureDyn-FL
framework and system workflow, while Section V details
the proposed model and defense mechanisms. Section VI
provides theoretical and security analysis. Section VII
presents the experimental setup and results. Section VIII
offers a comparative evaluation with existing state-of-theart methods. Section IX analyzes computational efficiency
and scalability. Finally, Section X concludes the paper and
outlines future research directions.
II. PROBLEM FORMULATION
In SecureDyn-FL models, a key focus is to secure the
entire FL pipeline, with a particular emphasis on the secure
aggregation of model updates. Clients contribute encrypted
gradients to the FL server, bolstering data privacy by
safeguarding individual contributions from both external
adversaries and the server itself. Secure aggregation in
SecureDyn-FL is distinct from simply sending encrypted
gradients; it involves combining these gradients in a manner that prevents revealing individual updates while still
facilitating effective global model training.
Given K clients with a dataset Di that may follow
either IID or non-IID data distributions, the goal is to
collaboratively train a global model M by minimizing the
loss function L. This must be achieved while ensuring data
privacy, robustness against adversarial attacks, and minimal
computational overhead. The SecureDyn-FL framework F
is designed to meet the following objectives:
• Handle both IID and non-IID data distributions across
clients.
• Ensure data privacy by allowing clients to contribute
to M without exposing their individual data.
• Verify encrypted gradients gi = ∇(Di , M ) to detect
malicious attacks.
• Implement secure aggregation of verified gradients to
enhance model robustness against poisoning attacks.
• Maintain high performance of M for all clients,
irrespective of data distribution variations.
• Minimize the overhead of encryption and gradient
verification while optimizing cryptographic efficiency.
The adversarial attack problem in SecureDyn-FL is
formulated as minimizing L(M ) under privacy, robustness,
and efficiency constraints, as expressed in Eq. 1.
 X
N
1
L(Di , M )
(1)
min L(M ) =
M
K i=1
When optimizing Eq. 1, the following constraints are
considered:
• The global model M is updated using verified gradients gi after their computation.
• Gradients gi = ∇(Di , M ) for i = 1, . . . , K are
encrypted to preserve confidentiality.
• Performance constraints, such as data security, model
robustness, adaptability to IID and non-IID data, and
cryptographic efficiency, are satisfied.

3

Fig. 1. Thread Model: Federated Learning-based Intrusion Detection
System (FL-IDS) in IoT networks with model inference and poisoning
attacks.

The gradients are verified using a predefined verification
function V a(gi ), as defined in Eq. 2.
(
benign
if gi ∈ non-malicious
V a(gi ) =
(2)
malicious otherwise
In Eq. 2 Va (gi ) denotes a binary auditing decision
variable produced by the temporal gradient auditing mechanism. A value of Va (gi ) = 1 indicates that the client
update gi is classified as benign and is therefore accepted
for aggregation, whereas Va (gi ) = 0 denotes that the
update is identified as malicious and consequently rejected.
This explicit interpretation improves the precision and
interpretability of the proposed formulation. This function
evaluates gi against expected non-malicious patterns, categorizing it accordingly. Such a mechanism ensures only
valid gradients contribute to updating the global model M ,
thus enhancing its accuracy and resilience in adversarial
SecureDyn-FL scenarios. Based on Eq. 2, the benign
gradients are passed to the global model:
  X
K
1
M =M −η×
×
V a(gi ) × gi
(3)
K
i=1
where η is the learning rate. The framework F also
evaluates accuracy, computation time, communication cost,
and resource utilization to ensure practical and efficient
real-world deployment.
A. Threat Model
This paper focuses on security and privacy threats in
FL that are exploitable by malicious users. Similar to [41],
[42], [43], and [44], we classify users into two categories:
benign or malicious, where malicious users (poisoners)
may have access to diverse local datasets. Although advanced adaptive poisoning attacks exist, this study focuses
on conventional model poisoning threats to maintain a
consistent basis for comparison. We explicitly assume
that users do not collude, excluding user-user collusion

from this scope. Additionally, complex scenarios, such as
server-client collusion or sophisticated adaptive attacks, are
beyond the current focus. This limitation ensures a fair
comparison with [42], [43], [17], [45], and [46], but also
sets the stage for future research to extend our model to
these more intricate threats, including various collusion
scenarios and auditor threats. The threat model for our
FL-based IDS in IoT networks, accounting for both model
inference and poisoning attacks, is illustrated in Fig. 1. In
this setting, an honest-but-curious server may attempt to
launch model inversion or related inference attacks by exploiting shared gradients to reconstruct sensitive local data,
while malicious clients may perform targeted or untargeted
poisoning to degrade detection performance. SecureDynFL mitigates these threats through additive homomorphic
encryption, which prevents the server from accessing raw
gradients, and temporal gradient auditing, which detects
and filters abnormal client updates before aggregation.
The specific threats and corresponding goals are:
1) Threat 1: The honest-but-curious (HBC) adversary: In FL, the server has access to all local gradients and ciphertexts and may act adversarially. The
system operates on the assumption of this HBC behavior, but the server could potentially launch privacy
attacks, including inferring the data privacy of users.
The core threat lies in adversaries seeking sensitive
global model information through data reconstruction
or inference attacks.
Goal 1: Safeguard the confidentiality of local gradients. Adversaries, including malicious servers, can
exploit shared gradients and global parameters to
expose sensitive user data. Encrypting individual
gradients before server transmission provides some
degree of confidentiality.
2) Threat 2: Inject poisonous gradients: Byzantine
actors can disrupt FL systems by submitting fraudulent gradients that mimic legitimate updates from
heterogeneous data, compromising model integrity.
Goal 2: Enhance the examination of encrypted gradients to distinguish benign from malicious updates,
strengthening resilience against poisoning attacks.
B. Design Goals
SecureDyn-FL aims to achieve the following design
goals to ensure high accuracy, robustness, privacy, and
efficiency, even under adversarial conditions:
1) Accuracy: Maintain high classification accuracy
across all clients, despite data imbalance, distribution
skew, or adversarial attacks. A dual-objective loss
function ensures dependable performance in both IID
and non-IID settings.
2) Robustness: Ensure resilience against targeted and
untargeted poisoning attacks, including adversaries
who change their strategies over time. This is
achieved through a dynamic temporal gradient auditing mechanism that tracks update behavior using
GMM clustering and MD.
3) Privacy: Sensitive data is protected during training
and communication using additive homomorphic encryption based on a modified ElGamal scheme, en-

4

abling secure gradient aggregation without exposing
raw updates.
4) Adaptability: Support client-level personalization
via logit-adjusted loss, allowing local models to adapt
to diverse class distributions while contributing to
global learning, vital for heterogeneous IoT environments.
5) Efficiency in Communication and Computation:
Incorporate adaptive quantization and dynamic unstructured pruning to reduce overhead in lowpower, bandwidth-constrained devices while preserving model quality.
III. L ITERATURE R EVIEW
The proliferation of IoT devices has generated massive
amounts of distributed data, necessitating learning frameworks that preserve privacy while enabling effective model
training. FL has emerged as a promising decentralized
paradigm, allowing multiple edge devices to collaboratively
train a global model by exchanging only model parameters
rather than raw data. This approach significantly mitigates
privacy risks and communication overhead compared to
centralized machine learning models. Despite these advantages, FL remains highly vulnerable to model poisoning
and backdoor attacks, wherein malicious clients manipulate
local gradients to degrade or subvert the global model.
Fang et al. [17] conducted the first systematic study of
local model poisoning against Byzantine-robust FL methods. Their findings revealed that existing defenses, which
were assumed to be robust against Byzantine failures,
can be substantially compromised across multiple realworld datasets, thereby exposing critical vulnerabilities in
federated optimization.
In response, researchers have proposed several defense
strategies to enhance the robustness of FL. Jebreel and
Domingo-Ferrer [47] introduced FL-Defender, which identifies attack-related neurons by analyzing last-layer gradient
behaviors and re-weights client updates based on workerwise angle similarity with PCA compression. Similarly,
Gill et al. [48] proposed FedDefender, leveraging differential testing on synthetic inputs and neuron activation fingerprinting to identify backdoor-infected clients, achieving
attack success rates as low as 10%. Erbil and Gursoy [49]
explored a clustering-based defense using X-Means to isolate malicious updates by selectively extracting indicative
DNN parameters, yielding up to 95% true positive rates.
To address large-scale attacks, Zhang et al. [50] developed
FLDetector, which detects malicious clients by analyzing
model-update inconsistencies across iterations. Malicious
participants are identified by their persistent deviation
from expected update patterns, allowing Byzantine-robust
methods to effectively train accurate models after removing
compromised clients. Collectively, these methods reflect a
growing body of work aimed at enhancing the security of
federated learning in distributed IoT environments.
IDSs play a crucial role in safeguarding IoT and industrial IoT (IIoT) infrastructures against cyber threats.
Traditional centralized IDS approaches face significant
challenges related to data privacy, communication overhead, and real-time processing in distributed networks. FLIDS has therefore emerged as an effective solution, com-

bining collaborative model training with privacy preservation. Bhavsar et al. [51] developed an FL-IDS using
logistic regression and CNN classifiers, achieving 94–99%
accuracy on NSL-KDD and Car-Hacking datasets when
deployed on low-power embedded devices such as Raspberry Pi. Akinie et al. [52] proposed a hybrid server–edge
framework that reduced memory consumption by 42% and
training time by 75%, while maintaining 99.2% detection
accuracy. Javeed et al. [53] combined CNN and BiLSTM
architectures within a zero-trust FL model to capture spatial–temporal features, demonstrating strong performance
on CICIDS2017 and Edge-IIoTset datasets. Rashid et al.
[54] further achieved 92.49% accuracy on Edge-IIoTset,
closely approaching the performance of centralized machine learning (93.92%), thus validating the effectiveness
of FL for intrusion detection without compromising privacy.
In IIoT environments, Ruzafa-Alcazar et al. [55] conducted a comprehensive evaluation of differential privacy
techniques applied to FL-IDS, comparing FedAvg and
Fed+ aggregation methods on the T ONIoT dataset under
non-IID data distributions. Sun et al. [56] advanced this line
of work by combining CNNs and Gated Recurrent Units
with Isolation Trees for anomaly detection, improving both
real-time performance and accuracy in non-IID settings.
Similarly, Azeez et al. [57] applied federated averaging on
CICIDS2017, achieving 95.2% accuracy, while Mahmud et
al. [58] demonstrated over 90% accuracy across multiple
attack types, including DoS, DDoS, and ransomware, in
IoT networks. Zakaria Abou El Houda et al. [59] proposed
an innovative approach that integrates secure aggregation
protocols with blockchain technology to ensure both data
integrity and privacy. Their system employs multi-party
computation to prevent data exposure between participants
and uses blockchain to provide tamper-resistance, achieving high detection accuracy on real-world IoT datasets.
Collectively, these studies demonstrate that FL-IDS offers a
scalable, privacy-preserving, and accurate intrusion detection mechanism for resource-constrained IoT environments.
Although FL inherently improves data privacy by avoiding raw data transmission, model updates themselves can
leak sensitive information. Moreover, defense mechanisms
against poisoning attacks must be designed carefully to
avoid privacy compromises. As a result, recent research
has focused on integrating advanced cryptographic techniques into federated learning to achieve both security
and privacy. Yazdinejad et al. [60] proposed an internal
auditing mechanism utilizing GMM and MD with additive homomorphic encryption (AHE) to detect malicious
encrypted gradients while minimizing computational overhead. Miao et al. [61] introduced RFed, a dual-server
framework that employs scaled dot-product attention to
achieve over 96% poisoning attack failure rates without relying on strong assumptions, thereby improving scalability
and robustness. Wu et al. [62] developed PBFL, integrating
two-trapdoor fully homomorphic encryption with secure
normalization and cosine similarity methods to defend
against poisoning while preventing privacy leakage during
detection. Similarly, Ma et al. [43] proposed ShieldFL,
which uses two-trapdoor homomorphic encryption and
secure cosine similarity measurements. ShieldFL achieved

5

30%–80% accuracy improvements against state-of-the-art
poisoning attacks under both IID and non-IID data conditions. These advances illustrate a growing emphasis on
privacy-preserving federated defense mechanisms, combining cryptographic primitives with statistical detection
techniques to enable secure and practical FL deployment
in large-scale IoT and IIoT networks.
Privacy preservation in federated learning has been
extensively explored through cryptographic and statistical techniques, including secure multiparty computation
(SMC), fully homomorphic encryption (FHE), differential
privacy (DP), and more recently, blockchain-based mechanisms. SMC and FHE provide strong security guarantees by
enabling computations on encrypted data without exposing
individual client updates. However, these approaches typically incur significant computational and communication
overhead, limiting their scalability in resource-constrained
IoT environments [27], [28]. DP techniques introduce
calibrated noise to model updates, effectively protecting
individual data privacy but often at the cost of reduced
model utility and convergence performance, particularly
in non-IID settings [33], [35]. To balance privacy and
efficiency, hybrid approaches have emerged that combine
DP with SMC or homomorphic encryption, aiming to
reduce overhead while maintaining strong privacy guarantees. In parallel, blockchain-based frameworks have been
proposed to improve the integrity and auditability of the
aggregation process. By leveraging immutable ledgers and
decentralized consensus, blockchain can prevent tampering
and ensure trustworthy model updates without relying on
a fully trusted central server [37], [63], [64]. While these
methods offer promising privacy protection, most existing
solutions struggle to simultaneously ensure lightweight
operation, robust poisoning defense, and high detection
accuracy in heterogeneous IoT deployments.
Existing federated learning-based IDS frameworks face
notable limitations in jointly addressing data heterogeneity,
adaptive poisoning resilience, and communication privacy
in realistic IoT environments. Current defenses often rely
on static detection mechanisms, trusted hardware, or heavy
cryptographic schemes, which either fail against stealthy
attacks or introduce prohibitive overhead in resourceconstrained settings. Moreover, non-IID data distributions
significantly hinder global model convergence and detection accuracy, a challenge insufficiently addressed by prior
works. To fill these gaps, this paper proposes SecureDynFL, a federated intrusion detection framework that integrates dynamic temporal gradient auditing, lightweight
privacy-preserving encryption, and personalized learning
strategies. This holistic approach simultaneously strengthens resilience against adaptive poisoning, enhances privacy
protection, and improves detection performance under nonIID conditions, thereby advancing the state of the art in
secure and efficient FL-based intrusion detection for IoT
networks.
IV. W ORK F LOW
The SecureDyn-FL framework follows a structured sequence of coordinated phases that together form an endto-end pipeline for secure, personalized, and robust intrusion detection in federated IoT environments. Rather

than treating each component in isolation, the workflow
integrates personalized learning, communication efficiency,
and security mechanisms into a cohesive process. Client
registration establishes trust and tracking, personalized
training ensures adaptability to non-IID data, pruning and
quantization reduce communication cost, encryption protects updates during transmission, and temporal gradient
auditing detects poisoning attacks before aggregation. This
high-level structure illustrates how each stage contributes
directly to the overarching IDS goal: detecting malicious
behavior while preserving data privacy and efficiency in
federated settings.
The proposed SecureDyn-FL framework operates
through a sequence of coordinated phases to ensure secure,
efficient, and personalized FL for intrusion detection in IoT
environments as shown in Fig. 2. The system initializes
the federated infrastructure by assigning unique identifiers
and cryptographic key pairs to each participating client.
Simultaneously, a Central Audit (CA) module prepares
a tagging and update tracking mechanism for later-stage
gradient verification and poisoning detection.
Each client performs personalized local training using
its non-IID data. The local model is decoupled into a
shared feature extractor and a private classifier. A dualloss strategy, comprising cross-entropy and mini-batch
logit adjustment, is used to enhance robustness against
class imbalance and heterogeneous distributions. Following
local training, clients apply soft, unstructured L1-normbased pruning with a dynamically increasing pruning rate
over rounds to reduce computational and communication
overhead while improving privacy. Subsequently, clients
quantize the pruned updates using an adaptive quantization
method. This involves computing a scale and zero-point to
map real-valued updates into a lower bit-width representation, reducing bandwidth usage without sacrificing accuracy. These quantized updates are then encrypted using the
CKKS homomorphic encryption scheme, enabling secure
aggregation at the server without decryption.
Before aggregation, a CA is conducted. The first phase
validates client identities and updates tags. The second
phase involves clustering using incremental GMMs, evaluating MD, and verifying temporal trajectory consistency of
updates. A dynamic multi-threshold decision mechanism
classifies client updates as accepted, down-weighted, or
rejected. Only verified and reliable gradients proceed to the
aggregation step. The server aggregates the validated updates and constructs a global model, which is redistributed
to clients for the next training round. Clients integrate the
updated model while continuing to refine local classifiers.
This workflow collectively ensures secure communication,
personalized learning, defense against poisoning attacks,
and robustness in heterogeneous IoT environments.
V. P ROPOSED M ODEL
This section presents proposed SecureDyn-FL, a novel
personalized FL framework tailored for intrusion detection
in non-IID IoT environments. To address the vulnerabilities
of FL against poisoning attacks, we introduce a serverside poisoned client detection mechanism before the global
model aggregation step of FL.

6

Fig. 2. Flowchart of the SecureDyn-FL framework, including device initialization, local model training on clients, security measures (e.g., poisoned
device detection and central auditing), optimization (via weight pruning and quantization), privacy-preserving aggregation at the server, and performance
evaluation before deploying the global model.

A. System Architecture Overview
The architecture consists of four key entities:
• Clients (IoT Devices): Distributed nodes that locally
train on non-IID data while preserving data privacy.
• Central Auditor: A trusted party responsible for
client registration, key distribution, secure aggregation, model auditing, and dissemination.
• Communication Network: Secure channels through
which encrypted updates and models are exchanged.
• Audit Table Repository: A secure, encrypted ledger
storing client-specific encrypted updates and behavioral metadata for auditing.
The architecture supports secure model updates, client
personalization, encryption-enabled communication, and
integrity verification, without revealing sensitive client information or raw data.

the communication channel against MITM attacks. For a
detailed algorithm, mathematical derivations, and message
exchanges, the reader is referred to [67].
C. Proposed Method: Multi-Objective Personalized Federated Learning
To tackle the challenges introduced by statistical heterogeneity (i.e., non-IID data distributions) in FL, we propose
a multi-objective personalized FL (MO-PFL) framework.
This approach adopts a decoupled dual-classifier strategy
coupled with a tailored multi-objective loss function. Our
architecture enables client-level personalization while preserving alignment with the global learning objective. As
shown in Fig. 3, the model consists of a shared feature
extractor and two decoupled classifiers: a personalized
classifier tuned to the local distribution and a global
classifier synchronized across clients.

B. Registration Phase
The device registration and authentication process comprises four main phases: registration, login, key exchange,
and authentication. During registration, each device is enrolled with the certification authority (CA), which assigns
a unique tag identity (TID) and generates a secret value
(HSV) based on the device’s MAC address. A hashed
identity (HID) is derived and stored securely to prevent
duplicate registrations [65], [66]. In the login phase, the device submits its HID for server validation, followed by the
exchange of masked random values to reconstruct shared
secrets. In the key exchange phase, both parties derive a
128-bit session key through random number operations and
bitwise transformations, ensuring confidentiality. Finally,
mutual authentication is achieved using HMAC-SHA256
over session keys, IP addresses, and nonces, securing

D. Model Architecture
Consider a client k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , K} with local dataset
k
Dk = {(xi , yi )}ni=1
sampled from a possibly non-IID
distribution Dk . The local model comprises:
d
p
• A shared feature extractor: f : R → R
pers
p
• A personalized classifier: hk
: R → R|C|
glob
p
• A global classifier: hk
: R → R|C|
For input x on client k, the model produces:
ŷ pers = hpers
k (f (x)),

ŷ glob = hglob
k (f (x))

(4)

The extractor f is globally shared and updated via the
FedAvg algorithm [11], while hpers
k remains private to each
client for local adaptation. The global classifier hglob
is
k
periodically synchronized across clients.

7

Fig. 3. System model of proposed SecureDyn-FL framework. The architecture integrates multiple defense mechanisms, including quantization, meanbased parameter clipping, and dynamic unstructured model pruning, followed by encrypted local training. The FL model is decoupled into a shared
feature extractor and dual classifiers (global and personalized) enabling multi-objective optimization. A trusted auditor monitors the training pipeline
to detect adversarial threats such as data/model poisoning and eavesdropping. Secure aggregation ensures the integrity and privacy of the global model.

E. Multi-Objective Loss Formulation
To balance personalization and global generalization, we
define a composite loss function:
a) Global Cross-Entropy Loss: This loss ensures consistency across clients by training the global classifier:
!
exp(ŷyglob )
glob
LCE (y, ŷ ) = − log P
(5)
glob
y ′ ∈C exp(ŷy ′ )
where C is the label space and ŷyglob
is the output logits
′
′
glob
for class y . y
as the predicted label generated by the
global classifier on each client. This value is utilized in
the computation of the global cross-entropy loss to ensure
alignment between local and global objectives during federated training.

b) Logit-Adjusted Personalization Loss: To handle
the local objective of the client and learn the personalized
model for each client, we apply a logit-adjusted crossentropy loss to the personalized classifier:
LLA (y, ŷ

pers

) = − log

exp(ŷypers + τ log αyk )
P
pers
k
y ′ ∈C exp(ŷy ′ + τ log αy ′ )

!

(6)
where αyk is the normalized frequency of class y in client
k. It is dynamically recalculated at the mini-batch level,
enabling real-time adaptation to batch-wise label skew. The
temperature parameter τ regulates the intensity of the logit
adjustment.
c) Mitigating Non-IID Challenges.: Beyond addressing class imbalance, the proposed dual-objective formula-

8

tion plays a crucial role in mitigating the adverse effects
of non-IID data distributions commonly observed in IoT
environments. The global cross-entropy loss LCE enforces
alignment with the global decision boundary by optimizing
shared representations collaboratively across clients, ensuring that local models do not drift too far from the global
objective. Meanwhile, the logit-adjusted personalization
loss LLA dynamically reweights logits based on local class
priors, which counteracts the bias introduced by label
distribution skew and stabilizes local training. By jointly
optimizing these objectives, the model achieves a balance
between local specialization and global consistency, reducing client-drift and improving the robustness of aggregation
under heterogeneous non-IID settings.
F. Optimization and Gradient Flow
The total loss for each client is:
Ltotal = LCE (y, ŷ glob ) +λ
{z
}
|
Global objective

LLA (y, ŷ pers )
|
{z
}

(7)

Personalization objective

a) Backward Pass:
pers
• hk
is updated using ∇LLA
glob
• hk
is updated using ∇LCE
• f is updated using ∇f (LCE + LLA )
G. Federated Training Protocol
Each local training round on client k proceeds through
the following steps:
1) Forward Pass:
The client computes intermediate features using the
shared feature extractor:
z = f (x)

(8)

These features are passed to both classifiers:
ŷ pers = hpers
k (z),

ŷ glob = hglob
k (z)

(9)

pers

Here, ŷ
reflects the personalized inference tailored
to local data, while ŷ glob contributes to the globally
shared model.
2) Loss Computation:
The total loss is formulated as a weighted sum of
the global cross-entropy loss and the logit-adjusted
personalization loss:
Ltotal = LCE (y, ŷ glob ) + λLLA (y, ŷ pers )

(10)

The parameter λ balances the trade-off between
global consistency and local adaptation.
3) Backpropagation:
Gradients are computed and applied separately:
pers
hpers
← hpers
k
k − η∇hk LLA

hglob
← hglob
− η∇hglob LCE
k
k
k

f ← f − η∇f (LCE + LLA )

(11)

The feature extractor f receives a combined gradient
from both loss terms, enabling it to capture features
that support both global generalization and local
personalization.

H. Quantization and Pruning
During local model training, we employed a pruning
technique to iteratively remove less important weights or
gradients from model updates. Specifically, clients perform soft unstructured pruning based on the L1 norm,
which creates a sparse model and makes the FL training
process more efficient. The pruning process is guided by
a dynamically updated pruning rate pt , which increases
over the communication rounds, allowing more aggressive
pruning as the training progresses. After pruning, clients
send their pruned updates to the server, which aggregates
them using FedAvg to generate the global model. This
pruning technique not only reduces the model size and
computational costs, but also makes the training process
more resistant to inference attacks.
By progressively increasing the pruning rate, communication efficiency improves throughout the rounds. As
clients share a sparsified model with the server, the transmitted model is no longer the full model, limiting the
information available to potential attackers. The sparsity
introduced by pruning constrains the parameter space,
significantly reducing the chances of reverse engineering
or inferring sensitive data. This reduction in exposed parameters inherently enhances privacy protection, making it
more difficult for adversaries to extract meaningful insights
about the underlying data.
The pruning rate pt is updated iteratively using Eq. 12:


t − teff
· (ptarget − p0 ) + p0
(12)
pt = max 0,
ttarget − teff
where pt is the pruning rate at round t, teff is the effective
round when pruning starts, ttarget is the target round when
the target pruning rate is reached, p0 is the initial pruning
rate, and ptarget is the target pruning rate. This pruning
rate increases gradually from the initial value to the target
value, ensuring that the pruning is progressively applied
more aggressively as training progresses.
After applying pruning to the model updates at each
t+1
client, the pruned local update ∆wp,i
is computed as:
t+1
∆wp,i
= ∆wit+1 ⊙ mti

(13)

where ⊙ represents the element-wise product, and mti
is the local pruning mask identifying pruned weights at
t+1
communication round t. This pruned update ∆wp,i
is then
quantized and sent to the server for aggregation.
We also used a layer-wise clipping technique based on
dynamic mean to help reduce inconsistencies during the
training process. The clipping factor controls the clipping
parameter, dynamically adjusting the clipping based on
layer-wise updates, rather than using a static clipping
method. This approach ensures that each layer’s updates
are clipped according to their specific dynamics, leading
to more stable and efficient training. After the local model
updates are computed, each client clips its own model
update ∆wit+1 to avoid instability before sending it to the
server. The clipping for client i’s model update is applied
using Eq. 14:
t+1
∆wC,i
= clip(∆wit+1 , −α · µi , α · µi )

(14)

where µi is the mean of the absolute values of the elements

9

of client i’s model update, calculated as:
µi =

n
X

1
t+1
∆wi,j
n j=1

default, the ElGamal cryptosystem supports multiplicative
homomorphism, that is,
(15)

The clipping function clip(∆wit+1 , a, b) ensures that the
values of ∆wit+1 are constrained within the range [−α ·
µi , α · µi ], thereby limiting the impact of extreme values.
Next, each client performs adaptive quantization (AQ),
a novel technique designed to address the communication
overhead challenges in FL for resource-constrained IoT
environments. AQ scheme allows devices to dynamically
adjust their quantization levels based on their available
communication resources. Unlike traditional quantization
methods that enforce a uniform strategy across all devices,
AQ accounts for device heterogeneity, enabling efficient
on-device training while maintaining model accuracy.
The AQ scheme employs a K-level quantizer, where K
represents the number of distinct values to which each
weight can be mapped. For each device i ∈ N , the
model updates xi are quantized to reduce their size before
transmission. We assume that the elements of xi fall within
the range [r1 , r2 ].
The quantization process is defined as follows: - The
range [r1 , r2 ] is partitioned into N contiguous intervals
with equal probability. - The threshold value separating
the l-th and (l + 1)-th intervals is given by Eq. 16.
T (l) = r1 + l · ∆N

(16)

where ∆N is the quantization interval, calculated using Eq.
17.
r2 − r1
(17)
∆N =
N −1
Each weight xi (k) is mapped to a discrete value x̄i (k)
using the following stochastic quantization rule:
(
i (N )−T (l)
T (l + 1) with probability Tx(l+1)−T
(l) ,
QN (xi (N )) =
T (l)
otherwise.
This rule assigns xi (N ) to the quantization level T (l+1)
with a probability proportional to its distance from T (l),
ensuring minimal distortion. The quantized output x̄i (N )
takes a discrete value from the set as shown in Eq. 18.
{r1 , r1 + ∆N , r1 + 2∆N , . . . , r2 − ∆N , r2 }

(18)

The key novelty of AQ lies in its ability to dynamically
adjust quantization levels based on the communication resources of each device. Devices with limited bandwidth can
use fewer quantization levels (smaller N ), while devices
with higher bandwidth can use more levels (larger N ). This
adaptive approach ensures that the communication overhead is minimized without compromising model accuracy.
AQ is scalable to large IoT networks with diverse device
capabilities, making it suitable for real-world deployments.
I. Additive ElGamal encryption based on discrete logarithm
After completing the quantization process, each client
encrypts the quantized model updates using the PRKG
algorithm. However, to facilitate secure aggregation in the
FL environment, it is essential to endow the ElGamal
cryptosystem with additive homomorphic properties. By

Enc(m1 ) · Enc(m2 ) = Enc(m1 · m1 ),

(19)

but it does not naturally support additive operations. To
achieve additive homomorphism necessary for FL model
aggregation, Zhu et al. [68] introduced a secure transformation technique based on the Cramer transformation,
enabling additive homomorphism over ElGamal-encrypted
data.
The transformation works by converting the original
plaintext m to an exponentiated form m′ = g m mod p,
thereby mapping the message space into Zp . The transformed ElGamal scheme then facilitates additive homomorphism as demonstrated in Eq. (20):
Enc(m1 ) · Enc(m2 ) = g m1 y r1 · g m2 y r2
= g m1 +m2 y r1 +r2

mod p

(20)

Although this transformation enables additive homomorphism, it significantly increases the computational burden
of encryption and decryption, primarily due to the necessity
of discrete logarithm recovery. Zhu et al. employed bruteforce search and logarithmic recovery techniques to retrieve
plaintexts, which are computationally intensive.
To ensure privacy during the federated learning process,
SecureDyn-FL employs a post-Cramer transformed additive ElGamal encryption scheme, enabling additive homomorphism while maintaining computational efficiency. This
allows encrypted local model updates to be aggregated on
the server without decryption, thereby preventing information leakage to both external adversaries and honestbut-curious servers. Unlike differential privacy, which introduces noise and can negatively impact utility, this encryption mechanism preserves the exact model updates,
thus avoiding accuracy degradation during aggregation.
The approach balances privacy and performance, offering
a practical alternative to DP or fully homomorphic encryption, which often impose significant computational costs.
The process involves the following steps:
First, select two large, distinct prime numbers pp and
qp of equal bit-length, and compute n = pp · qp and λ =
lcm(pp − 1, qp − 1), ensuring that n2 < p. Then, choose a
generator gp ∈ Z∗n2 such that
gcd(L(gpλ

mod n2 ), n) = 1,

(21)

denotes the L-function
where the function L(x) = x−1
n
used in the Paillier cryptosystem. With this setup, the
message m is transformed into m′ = gpm mod n2 , and
the encryption scheme is expressed as:
c := ⟨c1 = g r

mod p,

c2 = gpm

mod n2 ·y r

mod p⟩
(22)
This modified ciphertext structure retains additive homomorphism, enabling secure aggregation in FL. Upon
decryption using ElGamal, the transformed message m′ =
gpm mod n2 is obtained. The original plaintext m is recovered through the expression:
m=

L(gpm mod n2 )
L(gpλ mod n2 )

mod n

(23)

10

Therefore, if two clients u1 and u2 share the public
parameters (gp , n, λ), they can independently decrypt the
ciphertext and retrieve the plaintext m. The complete
encryption, homomorphic addition, and decryption process
is summarized in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Post-Cramer Transformation Based Encryption and Decryption
Encryption: Encpk (m) → JmK
1: Convert plaintext m to m′ = gpm mod n2 using postCramer transformation.
2: Compute ciphertext:
c1 = g r mod p
c2 = gpm mod n2 · y r mod p
JmK = ⟨c1 , c2 ⟩

Homomorphic Addition: Jm1 K · Jm2 K = Jm1 + m2 K
1: Let Jm1 K = ⟨c11 = g r1 mod p, c12 = gpm1 mod n2 ·
y r1 mod p⟩
2: Let Jm2 K = ⟨c21 = g r2 mod p, c22 = gpm2 mod n2 ·
y r2 mod p⟩
3: Compute:
c1 = g r1 +r2 mod p
c2 = gpm1 +m2 mod n2 · y r1 +r2 mod p
Jm1 + m2 K = ⟨c1 , c2 ⟩

Decryption: Decsk (JmK) → m
1: Compute:
gpm mod n2 ·y r
2 mod p
mod p
gpm mod n2 = gcxr
mod p =
g xr
2: Apply L-function: L(x) = x−1
n
3: Recover plaintext:
L(g m mod n2 )
m = L(gpλ mod n2 ) mod n
p

consistency analysis, and dynamic multi-threshold gradient
filtering.
At each communication round t, the auditor receives encrypted gradients from users. Instead of reinitializing clustering, the GMM parameters, denoted by θt , are updated
incrementally by blending the previous round’s parameters
θt−1 with the newly estimated parameters θnew as follows:
θt = αθt−1 + (1 − α)θnew ,

where α ∈ (0, 1) is the forgetting factor controlling the influence of historical information. This incremental updating
allows the clustering model to adapt gradually to evolving
data distributions without overreacting to local fluctuations,
thereby improving robustness in non-IID environments.
Following clustering, the MDMDi (t) for each user’s
gradient is computed relative to the mean and covariance
of its assigned cluster. To capture user behavior over time,
we introduce a trajectory consistency analysis by tracking
the variation in MD values across consecutive rounds.
Specifically, for each user i, the trajectory consistency score
is defined as
∆MDi = |MDi (t) − MDi (t − 1)|.

The CA module includes three phases: Phase 1 generates
keys and IDs as described in section, Phase 2 detects
and filters poisoning gradients, and Phase 3 aggregates
gradients, as discussed below.
Phase 1: System Initialization
The audit module initializes the federated system by
performing the following tasks:
• Generates pair-keys (public-private) K = (pk, qk) for
each user n, where n ∈ N and |N | = N .
• Assigns a unique tag ID {TID1 , TID2 , . . . , TIDn } to
each user.
• Constructs the Update Table that includes tuples
(TID , T able T ag) to facilitate CA on the user side.
Phase 2: Dynamic Temporal Gradient Auditing
The original Phase 2 auditing mechanism, which relied
on static clustering via GMM and MD filtering, exhibited
vulnerabilities under realistic FL conditions, particularly in
the presence of non-IID user data and adaptive adversaries.
Static clustering at each round caused instability in detection, while single-round MD evaluation failed to account
for temporal variations. To overcome these limitations,
we propose an improved Phase 2 auditing strategy that
integrates incremental GMM updating, temporal trajectory

(25)

A small ∆MDi suggests stable gradient behavior consistent with benign updates, while large variations may
indicate adversarial manipulation or instability.
To further enhance detection, a dynamic multi-threshold
filtering mechanism is employed, maintaining three adaptively updated thresholds:
• a gradient magnitude threshold derived from the historical distribution of benign gradient norms
• a MD threshold TMD defined as
TMD = k × σnormal ,

J. Central Auditor Protocol

(24)

(26)

where k is a sensitivity constant and σnormal is the
standard deviation of MD values from benign users,
• a trajectory consistency threshold based on the empirical distribution of ∆MDi values.
Gradients are filtered according to their compliance with
these thresholds: those satisfying all thresholds are accepted, those moderately deviating are down-weighted, and
those significantly deviating are rejected.
Through this integrated dynamic auditing process, the
model not only filters out obvious malicious gradients but
also mitigates the impact of stealthy or slowly-drifting
adversarial updates.
Phase 3: Byzantine-Resilient Gradient Aggregation
Once the Update Table is populated, the auditor transfers it to the server:
• The server and auditor interact to ensure Byzantinetolerant aggregation.
• For each communication round, the server applies a
robust aggregation function to the filtered gradients.
• The global model is updated with the aggregated
results, reinforcing reliability and resistance to Byzantine attacks in the FL environment.
K. Adversarial Resilience Analysis
SecureDyn-FL is designed to withstand multiple types
of adversarial behaviors that typically arise in federated

11

learning, including both data/model poisoning attacks and
inference-based privacy attacks such as model inversion.
• Resilience to Poisoning Attacks: In federated intrusion
detection, malicious clients may attempt to manipulate global model behavior by injecting carefully
crafted updates, either to reduce overall detection
performance (untargeted poisoning) or to deliberately
misclassify specific attack types (targeted poisoning).
SecureDyn-FL mitigates these threats through its temporal gradient auditing mechanism, which leverages
an incremental GMM and MD trajectory scoring.
By continuously modeling the distribution of benign
gradient patterns over time, the auditor can detect deviations that are subtle or adaptive in nature—such as
attacks that gradually poison the model over multiple
rounds—without requiring labeled attack examples.
Abnormal updates are flagged and removed prior
to aggregation, ensuring that malicious contributions
have minimal impact on the global model.
• Resilience to Model Inversion Attacks: In addition to
malicious clients, federated learning is vulnerable to
honest-but-curious servers that attempt to reconstruct
clients’ local data from shared gradients using model
inversion techniques. In SecureDyn-FL, this class of
attacks is neutralized through the use of additive
homomorphic encryption, which ensures that local
model updates are encrypted before transmission and
remain encrypted throughout the aggregation process.
As a result, the server never observes raw gradient information, making inversion or membership inference
attempts infeasible. Under the adopted cryptosystem,
the probability of successful gradient reconstruction is
negligible without the private keys of the participating
clients.
• Complementary Protection: By jointly integrating temporal gradient auditing and encryption,
SecureDyn-FL provides defense in depth against heterogeneous adversarial strategies. While encryption
protects against server-side inference and eavesdropping, auditing detects and filters malicious client
behavior. This complementary design enhances the
overall robustness of federated intrusion detection
systems in realistic IoT environments, where both
privacy breaches and active poisoning threats may cooccur.
VI. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS
Secure training in SecureDyn-FL consists of three key
phases: users’ local training, auditor training, and robust
aggregation. Below, we present the theoretical foundations
of each phase, supported by lemmas and theorems to ensure
both correctness and security.

Gradient Descent (SGD) with momentum, incorporating
past gradients through an exponential decay factor ∂ (0 <
∂ < 1):
X
∂ t−l glx .
gx ∼
(27)
l∈[0,t]

As shown in prior work (e.g., [41]), momentum accelerates convergence, reduces variance, and enhances robustness, helping mitigate poisoning attacks in federated
training.
b) Auditor Training
The auditor identifies malicious gradients using GMM
and MD. The process involves the following steps:
• Collecting labeled data containing benign gradients gi
and malicious gradients gi∗ .
• Extracting and normalizing features Xi for consistent
scaling.
• Dividing the data into training (Dtrain ) and validation
(Dval ) sets.
• Training a GMM using Expectation-Maximization
[42] to estimate parameters for benign and malicious
clusters, initially setting k = 2 clusters [6].
• Iteratively adjusting the number of clusters using the
Bayesian information criterion (BIC) to adapt to the
gradient distribution and minimize misclassifications.
This dynamic clustering approach ensures effective
adaptation to encrypted gradient distributions, reducing
false positives, particularly in environments with predominantly benign users.
C ORRECTNESS
Correctness ensures the accurate sharing of encrypted
gradients and effective auditing to filter out malicious
contributions.
Lemma 1. Upon receiving user updates via the audit table
ϕ, the server employs these updates to refine the global
model. The incremented version of the global model is
derived from the equation:
N


1 X
1 − Mkti ϕt + Mkti ϕτki .
ϕτ +1 =
N i=1

(28)

Here, ϕτ +1 represents the updated audit table at the
subsequent time step, N stands for the total number of
users, Mkti is the model from the i-th user, and ϕτki denotes
the i-th user’s entry in the audit table at time step τ .
Lemma 2. The CA holds the security property, such as
pair keys (pk, qk), and learns nothing about private data
like gradients and the aggregation results.

a) Users’ Local Training

Lemma 3. AHE ensures the confidentiality of both the user
and server sides since user i encrypts its gradients denoted
m
by xm
i . Then, each user sends Enc(σi ).

In this phase, we assume that the proportion of malicious
users does not exceed 50%. During training round t, every
user nxt , where x ranges from 1 to m, obtains the encrypted
ftpk , ecrypts it using their public key pk,
global model M
and trains a local model to compute the gradient vector
gtx . To improve the update process, we apply Stochastic

Lemma 4. The cryptosystem is clear by defining a random
value as r, r = ab to have two prime factors of equal size
a and b and letting c ∈ Z and k1 , k2 ∈ Z×
r . It is possible
to compute Enc(k1 + k2 ) using only the public key and the
Encryption Enc(k1 ), Enc(m2 ). Additionally, Enc(m × k1 )
can be calculated given a constant m.

12

Under Lemmas 1 and 2, the audit protocol enables the
Updated Table to carry user gradients for the aggregation process. The Updated Table is populated by users
(Ui ⊆ U ) at round t, with gradients reflecting diverse
data quality and distributions. Trustworthy auditors and
user compliance with the workflow, absence of malicious
activity, ensure correct gradient vector W aggregation.
Theorem 1 (Robustness against malicious gradients via
auditability - IID). Based on Lemma 1 and the participation of registered users as (Ui ⊆ U, i ∈ N ), we have
{U1 , U2 , . . . , Un }, that j ⊆ Ui ⊆ U denotes users that
send malicious gradients. The assumption is |j| ≤ ⌊n/2⌋,
and the auditor traces users based on the audit protocol
to find the adversarial users. Our proposed model checks
the gradient distribution and behavior for all users to remove the effect of adversary user participation and obtain
robustness. Therefore, the auditor can confirm user k and
calculate that the gradient gk is valid. Adversarial users
who send malicious updates will have their ID revoked. We
can guarantee to reduce their effect on them.
In this regard, based on proof of Lemma 1, the symbol
Ui Ui+1 represents users who uploaded data in round t, but
some users may still inject false data in round t + 1 in the
IID setting. Thus, each user holds a local gradient denoted
as xn (where n ∈ U ). According to Lemma 2, the auditor
can obtain the following expression:
JW Kpk =

n
Y

JW i Kpk =

i=1

n
X
i=1

JW i Kpk .

(29)

Here, W represents the aggregated encrypted gradients,
and W i represents the
Qn encrypted gradient from the ith user. The symbol i=1 denotes the product operator,
indicating that the encrypted P
gradients from all users are
n
multiplied together. Likewise, i=1 represents the summation operator, indicating that the encrypted gradients from
all users are summed together. It is important to note that
the encrypted gradients have been
Pn received confidentially
and can be expressed as W = i=1 Wi (see Lemma 3).
In the following round, the auditor computes the GMM
for gradients, then tracks wt+1 with the MD, using the
parameters provided by every user in round t + 1,
P
t
u⊂Ut wu
wt+1 ← P
M
(30)
t
u mk
to track benign and adversaries. The assumption is that
there are fewer than half the users who are adversaries
⌊ U2t ⌋; hence, the mean of each cluster is expected to
correspond to the similarity value of at least one benign
user.
The auditor first calculates the covariance matrix for
cluster the variance and correlation structure and then
applies MD to detect injected false data (see Audit section
V-B). Therefore, wi , wj , wz , i, j, z ∈ F M (i, z ∈ [1, N ],
j ∈ [1, N/2]) are gradients corresponding to the similarity position of benign users and adversaries. According
Lemma 4, benign users gradients, wi , wz ∈ F M satisfies:
wi + wz ≡ xti + yzt

(mod mt )

(31)

While gradients of adversarial users wj ∈ F M cannot
satisfy Eq. (3). Note that t = {1, 2, . . . , k}, xti , t is an

element in the Pi ’s original gradient Wi .
Theorem 2. The proposed scheme is secure in terms of
user gradient confidentiality.
Proof. In SecureDyn-FL, privacy leakage mainly occurs in
the following three scenarios:
1) Gradient transmission process
2) Poisoning detection process
3) Key leakage
1. Gradient Transmission Security: SecureDyn-FL employs Elgamal encryption technology to protect the gradient information submitted by users during transmission.
This security framework ensures that sensitive information exchanged between participants is not accessible to
unauthorized adversaries. Furthermore, since the keys are
generated in a distributed manner, no single entity within
the system has complete knowledge of the key information.
Mathematically, for an adversary to access user data
without the private key, they would need to solve the
discrete logarithm problem:
Given (g, g x mod p), find x

(32)

where g is a generator of the multiplicative group, p is
a large prime, and x is the private key. This problem is
computationally infeasible for sufficiently large parameters.
2. Poisoning Detection Privacy: To safeguard privacy during poisoning detection, SecureDyn-FL uses one-time pad
encryption for gradients, which provides perfect secrecy
when:
c=m⊕k
(33)
where c is the ciphertext, m is the plaintext gradient, and
k is the random mask. The masks are generated by CPC
members through (T, n)-threshold secret sharing, ensuring
that:
|S| < T ⇒ Pr[reconstruct k] = negligible

(34)

for any subset of colluding parties S.
3. Key Security: The PRKG key generation in SecureDynFL uses Shamir’s secret sharing where:
f (x) = s + a1 x + · · · + aT −1 xT −1 mod p

(35)

and shares are (xi , f (xi )). The secret s (private key) can
only be recovered when:
s=

T
X
i=1

f (xi )

T
Y

xj
x
− xi
j=1 j

(36)

j̸=i

which requires at least T participants for successful reconstruction.
By analyzing these three aspects, including secure
gradient transmission via Elgamal encryption, privacypreserving poisoning detection using one-time pads with
threshold masks, and robust key management through
PRKG, we conclude that SecureDyn-FL effectively protects the confidentiality of gradient information.
Theorem 3 (Robustness against malicious gradients via
auditability - non-IID). According to Theorem 1, there is a
subset of user gradients donated by (Hi ⊆ U, i ∈ [N/2])
that lie on the boundary of gradient similarities, as indicated by Eq. (2). This implies that users i ∈ Di possess

13

non-IID data. However, the auditor must distinguish between legitimate users and adversaries, introducing gradient drift. Thus, in the t-th round, the auditor leverages the
∗
gradient of the global model wt−1
from the previous round
to analyze the current behavior of the gradient wt , where
∗
wt−1
= (wt − wt−1 )/ε, and ε represents the direction of
the global model gradient (Lemma 4).
Consequently, the auditor approximates the benign gra∗
dient update in the t-th round as w
et∗ ≈ wt−1
= (wt −
wt−1 )/ε. In a gradient drift attack, the direction of the
gradient ε does not converge, as the attacker can use an
inappropriate scaling factor ε to amplify fake local model
updates, ensuring their magnitudes are no smaller than
those from genuine users. The attacker i sends a fake
gradient as wt∗i = −ε(wt − wt−1 ).
VII. E XPERIMENTAL A NALYSIS
This section presents the experimental evaluation of the
proposed SecureDyn-FL framework using the N-BaIoT
T ONIoT dataset. We compare its performance against
several state-of-the-art methods to assess its effectiveness
under varying data distribution and poisoning attack scenarios. Details of the experimental environment, dataset
preparation, and data distribution strategies are provided
below.

To provide a clear and structured overview of the data
employed in this study, Tables I and II summarize the
distribution of samples across the attack categories for the
T ONIoT and mini-N-BaIoT datasets, respectively. The tables have been designed with consistent formatting to facilitate straightforward comparison between the two datasets.
While the T ONIoT dataset reflects realistic network conditions with significant class imbalance across multiple attack
categories, the mini-N-BaIoT dataset is more balanced,
containing evenly distributed samples across various Mirai
and BASHLITE attack subtypes.
TABLE I
D ISTRIBUTION OF TRAINING AND TEST SAMPLES ACROSS ATTACK
CATEGORIES IN THE T ONIoT DATASET.

Attack Category
Normal
Scanning
DoS
DDoS
Ransomware
Backdoor
Injection Attack
XSS
Password Violations
MITM

Training Samples
245,000
20,000
20,000
20,000
16,030
20,000
20,000
13,844
20,000
593

Test Samples
55,000
3,973
4,000
4,000
3,970
4,000
4,000
6,116
4,000
459

Experimental Environment
All experiments were conducted using the PyTorch
framework. The client-side evaluations were performed on
a machine equipped with an Intel Core i7-10750H CPU @
2.60 GHz and 64 GB of RAM.
Dataset Description
To rigorously evaluate the performance and generalizability of the proposed framework, two widely recognized
benchmark datasets were employed: the N-BaIoT dataset
[69] and the T ONIoT dataset [70]. The N-BaIoT dataset
comprises network traffic traces generated by nine commercially available IoT devices that were intentionally compromised using the Mirai and BASHLITE malware families.
In total, the dataset contains more than 70 million traffic
records, each represented by a 115-dimensional feature
vector derived from statistical characteristics of network
flows. This dataset is designed to support binary classification tasks—differentiating benign from malicious traffic—while also offering ten distinct attack sub-categories
corresponding to various manifestations of the underlying
malware.
The T ONIoT dataset, on the other hand, encompasses
a diverse spectrum of IoT-related cyberattacks alongside
legitimate traffic instances. It integrates telemetry and
network data, annotated with 46 labeled features that
capture relevant behavioral attributes. Unlike N-BaIoT, the
T ONIoT dataset frames the detection problem as a multiclass classification task, aiming to distinguish between
normal activity and multiple heterogeneous attack types.
This combination of datasets enables a comprehensive and
robust evaluation across both binary and multi-class intrusion detection scenarios, reflecting realistic IoT network
environments.

TABLE II
D ISTRIBUTION OF SAMPLES ACROSS ATTACK CATEGORIES IN THE
MINI -N-BA I OT DATASET.

Attack Category
Mirai - Scan
Mirai - UDP
Mirai - UDPplain
Mirai - Syn
Mirai - Ack
BASHLITE - Scan
BASHLITE - Junk
BASHLITE - UDP
BASHLITE - TCP
BASHLITE - Combo
Benign

Number of Samples
7,000
7,000
7,000
7,000
7,000
9,000
9,000
9,000
9,000
9,000
90,000

The mini-N-BaIoT dataset was partitioned into training
and testing subsets using a 70:30 split. The training data
was distributed among participating clients in the FL setup,
while the testing data was centrally used to evaluate the
performance of the aggregated model. To simulate a realistic FL environment with a large number of participants,
the training dataset was further divided among 20 clients.
This client-simulation strategy is widely adopted in FL
literature to mimic decentralized data scenarios. The key
hyperparameters used in our experiments are summarized
in Table III.
Data Distribution Scenarios
To investigate the robustness of the proposed framework
under heterogeneous conditions, we implemented three
distinct data distribution settings across the 20 clients. The

14

A. Accuracy, Robustness, & Malicious Alarm Analysis

TABLE III
H YPERPARAMETERS .

In model poisoning, adversaries aim to optimize
Neural network parameters
Local model
Number of conv layers
Kernel filters in each conv layer
Number of fully connected layers
Number of units in each FC layer
Activation function
Dropout
Optimizer
Learning rate
Momentum
Batch size

1DCNN
3
256, 128, and 64
2
32, 2
ReLU
0.2
SGD
0.001
0.9
64

Federated learning parameters
Number of clients
Local training epoch
Communication round

20
4
50

scenarios are designed to simulate both IID and non-IID
data distributions, as described below:
• Non-IID Scenario 1: The client data is sampled using
a Dirichlet distribution with concentration parameter
η = 0.1, inducing high heterogeneity across clients.
• Non-IID Scenario 2: Half of the clients are assigned
only benign traffic samples, while the remaining half
receive only attack samples. This setup reflects practical conditions where some IoT devices may never be
compromised.
• IID Scenario: Each client receives a balanced dataset
composed of 50% benign and 50% attack samples,
ensuring uniform data distribution across all clients.
In both the IID and Non-IID Scenario 1, each client is
allocated exactly 1000 samples to ensure consistency in
local training workloads. In Non-IID Scenario 2, clients
with only benign samples are assigned 500 samples, while
those with only attack data are assigned 1000 samples.
This variation mirrors real-world traffic imbalances where
benign traffic is more prevalent and not all devices experience attacks.
Poisoning attack setting
To evaluate the performance of our approach, we simulate a range of model poisoning attacks using encrypted
local gradients. These simulations examine varying degrees
of adversarial presence, represented by different attack
ratios, α, which we set at 10%, 20%, 30%, and 50%. In
evaluating FL, similar to the assessment of related work
based on [43], the number of users is related to the number
of classes in each dataset to provide IID and non-IID
settings. For the N-BaIoT dataset, 20 users participated, and
the attack aims to transform instances from Class 9 to Class
11. In addition to the above configurations, we establish
a baseline model representing a poisoned SecureDyn-FL
system without any defense mechanisms or central audit.
This baseline model serves as a comparison point, illustrating the enhanced effectiveness of our proposed approach
in defending against various model poisoning attacks.

arg max Ht (w − w∗ ),
i∈[1,n]

(37)

where H is a vector representing the model’s direction
changes, w is the pre-attack model, and w∗ is the poisoned
model in targeted and untargeted attacks. Our evaluation
metrics for targeted attacks include Attack Class Accuracy,
which measures testing performance on the targeted labels, and Benign Class Accuracy, which evaluates learning
performance on non-source and non-target labels. These
metrics are crucial for detecting potential auditing failures
and unintended adverse effects on the FL system. Additionally, Overall Accuracy represents the average classification
performance across all labels, providing a comprehensive
view of the defense mechanisms’ effectiveness against
poisoning attacks. The Malicious Alarm, assessed using
the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve, reflects
the capability of defense algorithms to accurately identify malicious activities within the FL environment. It is
important to note that Overall Accuracy may differ from
the combined Attack Class and Benign Class accuracies
due to the impact of various attack and defense strategies.
For untargeted attacks, we focus on evaluating Overall
Accuracy and the Malicious Alarm metrics.

Accuracy Evaluation Under Targeted and Untargeted Attacks with Baseline Model
Table VIII presents a comparative analysis of the baseline and the proposed model under targeted and untargeted
poisoning attacks, considering both non-IID and IID data
distributions with a fixed attack rate of 50%.
Under the non-IID setting, the baseline model shows
poor performance across all metrics. For targeted attacks,
it records a Tacc of 0.015, an Oacc of 0.94, and an F1score of 0.04. In untargeted attacks, the baseline improves
slightly, with Tacc = 0.782, Oacc = 0.761, and F1-score of
0.62. In contrast, the proposed model shows substantial
performance gains. For targeted attacks, it achieves a
Tacc of 0.995, Oacc of 0.992, and an F1-score of 0.89.
During untargeted attacks, it maintains strong results with
Tacc = 0.989, Oacc = 0.967, and F1-score of 0.84,
highlighting its robustness against adversarial threats under
data heterogeneity.
Under the IID setting, where training data is evenly
distributed among clients, the baseline model still underperforms. For targeted attacks, it yields a Tacc of 0.049, an
Oacc of 0.60, and an F1-score of 0.47. In untargeted attacks,
the results slightly improve, with Tacc = 0.58, Oacc = 0.52,
and an F1-score of 0.55. The proposed model, however,
consistently outperforms the baseline. For targeted attacks,
it achieves a near-perfect Tacc of 0.997, Oacc of 0.995,
and F1-score of 0.98. In untargeted attacks, it delivers
Tacc = 0.992, Oacc = 0.991, and F1-score of 0.96. These
results confirm the proposed model’s robustness and generalizability across both homogeneous and heterogeneous
data distributions, establishing its efficacy in defending FL
systems against diverse poisoning threats.

15

B. Robustness and Auditing Evaluation
a) RTAnonIID : Robustness to Targeted Attacks (NonIID): The robustness of the proposed model under targeted
attacks with non-IID data is evaluated in Fig. 9, where
performance is analyzed across varying attack rates from
10% to 50%. The results reveal that the model consistently
maintains high accuracy levels, with minimal degradation
despite increased attack intensity. This consistency underscores the model’s ability to sustain reliable performance
even in adversarial environments, thereby confirming its
robustness to targeted poisoning in non-IID scenarios.
b) RUTAnonIID : Robustness to Untargeted Attacks (NonIID): As shown in Fig. 10, the proposed model also
exhibits high resilience against untargeted attacks under
non-IID data settings. Across varying attack rates and user
distributions, the accuracy remains stable and robust. This
reinforces the model’s capacity to mitigate the effects of
non-specific adversarial disruptions, preserving its integrity
and predictive performance.
c) RTAIID : Robustness to Targeted Attacks (IID): To
evaluate robustness under IID data conditions, the model
is exposed to targeted attacks across varying attack rates,
as shown in Fig. 8. The proposed method consistently
maintains stable accuracy, demonstrating resilience against
adversarial intensities. These results underscore its effectiveness in protecting FL systems under homogeneous
data distributions, ensuring robust defense even when the
training process is explicitly targeted.
d) RUTAIID : Robustness to Untargeted Attacks (IID):
The model’s performance under untargeted attacks with IID
data is illustrated in Fig. 11. Despite the uniform distribution of training data, which typically increases vulnerability, the proposed approach sustains high accuracy levels
across a wide range of adversarial configurations. These
results confirm the model’s reliability and adaptability in
diverse deployment environments, supporting its utility in
real-world FL applications.
e) Model Auditing (MA) Evaluation: The CA of
the proposed model is assessed through ROC analysis,
focusing on its ability to detect both falsely labeled malicious and clean users. As shown in Figs. 4 and 5, the
ROC curves for both IID and non-IID scenarios on the
KDDCup dataset exhibit superior characteristics compared
to baselines. The proposed model achieves the highest
average ROC, demonstrating not only strong classification
performance but also effective auditing functionality. These
findings highlight that the robustness and precision of the
CA module significantly contribute to the overall reliability
of the model, ensuring comprehensive protection against
FL poisoning threats.
VIII. C OMPARISON WITH S TATE - OF - THE -A RT
R ESEARCH
In this section, we comprehensively evaluate the robustness of our proposed SecureDyn-FL framework against
poisoning attacks on non-IID data distributions and compare it with several state-of-the-art methods, including FedAvg, coordinate-wise median, trimmed mean,
multi-Krum, and FL-Defender. Furthermore, additional
comparisons with advanced schemes such as Trimmed
Means [17], FL-Defender [47], FedAvg [11], FLTrust,

Fig. 4. Analyzing malicious alarms on IID data

Fig. 5. Analyzing malicious alarms on non-IID data

and ShieldFL [43] are also provided to demonstrate the
superiority of our model under various data settings and
attack types.
Beyond these baseline defenses, we also compare
SecureDyn-FL with representative state-of-the-art FLbased IDS frameworks from the literature, including
Ruzafa-Alcázar et al. (DP-based Industrial IoT), Bhavsar
et al. (Transportation FL-IDS), Friha et al. (FELIDS), and
PEIoT-DS (N-BaIoT).
A. Comparative Accuracy Analysis with SOTA FL-IDS.
To comprehensively evaluate the effectiveness of
SecureDyn-FL, we conducted comparative analyses against
several representative state-of-the-art (SOTA) FL-based in-

16

trusion detection frameworks on both the mini-N-BaIoT
and T ONIoT datasets. Figures 6 and 7 illustrate the accuracy convergence behavior of all methods across training
rounds.
On the mini-N-BaIoT dataset Figure 6, SecureDyn-FL
demonstrates consistently faster convergence and achieves
the highest final accuracy among all compared methods.
Specifically, SecureDyn-FL attains a final accuracy of
approximately 99.5%, surpassing Bhavsar et al. (97%),
Friha et al. (96%), PEIoT-DS (95%), and Ruzafa-Alcázar
et al. (93%). These results highlight the model’s ability to
learn efficiently in a relatively balanced and less diverse
IoT network environment.
On the more challenging T ONIoT dataset Figure 7,
which exhibits greater heterogeneity, class imbalance, and
a broader range of attack scenarios, all methods show
slightly lower final accuracies and slower convergence.
Nonetheless, SecureDyn-FL maintains a distinct advantage, converging faster and reaching a final accuracy of
approximately 98.6%. In contrast, Bhavsar et al., Friha et
al., PEIoT-DS, and Ruzafa-Alcázar et al. achieve 95.0%,
94.2%, 93.5%, and 92.0% respectively. This performance
gap underscores SecureDyn-FL’s robustness in more realistic and complex IoT intrusion detection scenarios.
Taken together, these results demonstrate not only the
superior detection performance of SecureDyn-FL under
federated learning settings but also its strong generalizability across datasets of varying complexity. While many
existing frameworks exhibit significant performance drops
when transitioning from simpler to more heterogeneous
data distributions, SecureDyn-FL consistently maintains
high accuracy and rapid convergence. This indicates that
the proposed framework can adapt effectively to diverse
IoT environments without extensive reconfiguration or accuracy degradation.
Moreover, by integrating additive homomorphic encryption and temporal gradient auditing, SecureDyn-FL provides enhanced privacy protection without compromising
model performance. Unlike approaches based on differential privacy—which often trade off utility for privacy—or
those that expose raw gradients to the server, SecureDynFL achieves strong privacy guarantees and robustness concurrently.

Fig. 6. Accuracy convergence comparison on the mini-N-BaIoT dataset
between SecureDyn-FL and representative SOTA FL-based IDS methods.
Synthetic convergence curves are based on reported final accuracies.
SecureDyn-FL achieves both faster convergence and higher final accuracy.

B. Scenario 1: Dirichlet Non-IID Data Distribution
In the first scenario, non-IID data was generated using a
Dirichlet distribution with a concentration parameter η =
0.1, simulating a highly imbalanced client data distribution.
In the absence of poisoning, all methods demonstrated
strong performance, with the proposed model achieving the
highest accuracy 0.9842 and F1-score 0.9801, albeit with
a slight performance dip (1̃%) compared to IID settings.
As shown in Table VI, the proposed method consistently
outperforms existing defense strategies under all poisoning
attack scenarios, maintaining high classification accuracy
and very low attack success rates (ASR). For instance,
under benign label-flipping attacks, while other methods
like FedAvg and FL-Defender suffer ASRs of 0.0185 and
1.0000 respectively, the proposed model limits the ASR to
just 0.0072. Even in the combined label-flipping attack,
where methods such as Shield FL and FL trust show

Fig. 7. Accuracy convergence comparison on the T ONIoT dataset
between SecureDyn-FL and representative SOTA FL-based IDS methods.
Despite increased dataset heterogeneity, SecureDyn-FL maintains superior
convergence speed, accuracy, and generalizability.

degraded performance e.g., ASR of 0.0345 and 0.5034
respectively. The proposed model retains a strong F1-score
of 0.9645 and limits ASR to 0.0512.
Under model-scaling attacks, traditional defenses like
FedAvg and trimmed mean drop to 45.12% accuracy
and F1-score of 0.6414, exposing them to high false
alarm rates. In contrast, the proposed method remains
robust, with accuracy at 97.07% and F1-score of 0.9695,
while maintaining ASR at a minimal 0.0568. A similar
trend is observed under the same-model poisoning at-

17

tack, where the proposed method delivers the best results
across all metrics—97.01% accuracy, 0.9708 F1-score,
and only 0.0402 ASR—demonstrating its resilience to
backdoor-style threats. Overall, these results highlight the
effectiveness of SecureDyn-FL in maintaining detection
performance even under severe non-IID conditions and
adversarial settings.
C. Scenario 2: Clients with Missing Attack Labels
The second scenario simulates a more realistic IoT environment, where attack samples are absent from half of the
clients. This setup reflects practical federated deployments,
where not all edge devices observe malicious behavior,
resulting in sparse and partially distributed attack data.
As shown in Table VII, the proposed method consistently achieves the highest performance across all metrics,
even outperforming FedAvg, which traditionally handles
IID settings well. In the absence of attacks, the proposed
model attains 98.40% accuracy and 0.9838 F1-score, shows
its ability to preserve model quality without any degradation.
Under benign label-flipping attacks, the proposed
method limits the attack success rate (ASR) to a mere
0.0061, whereas all other baselines—including Shield FL,
FL Trust, and FL-Defender—fail completely, recording an
ASR of 1.0000. Similarly, under attacks where malicious
labels are flipped to benign, the proposed model maintains
high accuracy 0.9814, F1-score 0.9775, and the lowest ASR
0.0738, while FL Trust and Shield FL show significant
degradation in both accuracy and F1 performance.
In combined label-flipping scenarios, most methods see
a marked drop, with trimmed mean and FL-Defender
yielding F1-scores of 0.6381 and 0.6378 respectively, also
ASRs exceeding 0.5. The proposed model, in contrast,
delivers a high F1-score of 0.9762, accuracy of 0.9698,
and an ASR of only 0.0421.
For model-scaling attacks, which often lead to oversuppression of legitimate updates, methods like FedAvg
and Shield FL fall to 47.06% accuracy and F1-scores near
0.64, misclassifying most benign data. However, the proposed method effectively mitigates these attacks, achieving
98.23% accuracy, 0.9725 F1-score, and a low ASR of
0.0341. Even in same-model poisoning, where poisoned
updates are identical across clients, the proposed method
again stands out, achieving the highest accuracy 99.01%,
F1-score 0.9893, and the lowest ASR 0.0405 among all
tested methods.
Interestingly, as shown in Tables VI and VII, the FedAvg baseline demonstrates relatively strong performance
in certain experimental settings, in some cases approaching
the accuracy of more robust aggregation methods. This
behavior can be explained by the moderate adversarial
participation ratios and data distributions used in these
scenarios, where the majority of clients provide benign
updates. Under such conditions, FedAvg’s simple averaging
can still yield a stable and accurate global model because
the impact of malicious gradients is statistically diluted
by the dominant benign contributions. Moreover, FedAvg
often exhibits fast initial convergence in clean settings,
which can temporarily narrow the performance gap with

more advanced defense mechanisms. However, as adversarial intensity or data heterogeneity increases, FedAvg
lacks the necessary resilience and its performance degrades
significantly compared to SecureDyn-FL, as shown in the
higher attack ratios and non-IID settings.
SecureDyn-FL successfully defended against all poisoning strategies in this challenging non-IID setting, preserving high accuracy and maintaining a low ASR, confirming
its strong resilience under data heterogeneity and sparsity.

D. Privacy Evaluation Against Inference Attacks
To complement the theoretical privacy guarantees of
SecureDyn-FL, we conduct experimental validation against
two common privacy attacks in federated learning: gradient inversion and membership inference.
For gradient inversion, we apply the attack method to
both FedAvg and SecureDyn-FL. In FedAvg, where the
server has access to raw model updates, the attacker can
successfully reconstruct client-side input features with high
visual and numerical similarity. In contrast, SecureDynFL employs additive homomorphic encryption before
gradient transmission, which prevents the server from observing raw gradients. As a result, reconstruction attempts
produce only random noise, indicating that no meaningful
information can be recovered.
For membership inference, we evaluate the attack accuracy against both FedAvg and SecureDyn-FL. While
FedAvg exhibits elevated inference accuracy, indicating
information leakage through gradient updates, SecureDynFL achieves attack performance close to random guessing,
confirming that encrypted gradients significantly reduce
leakage.
Table IV summarizes the results of the gradient inversion
and membership inference attacks conducted on the FedAvg baseline and the proposed SecureDyn-FL framework.
For the gradient inversion attack, we use the Structural
Similarity Index Measure (SSIM) between the original
client data and the reconstructed data to quantify the extent
of information leakage. Higher SSIM values indicate more
successful reconstruction and thus greater privacy risk.
As shown in the table, FedAvg exhibits a high SSIM
score (0.78), demonstrating that the server can effectively reconstruct sensitive client data when raw gradients
are exposed. In contrast, SecureDyn-FL achieves a very
low SSIM score (0.07), indicating that gradient inversion
produces only random noise due to the use of additive
homomorphic encryption, which prevents the server from
observing raw updates.
For membership inference, we report the attacker’s classification accuracy in determining whether a given data
sample was part of the training set. FedAvg shows high
inference accuracy (0.82), implying considerable leakage
through gradients, whereas SecureDyn-FL achieves nearrandom inference accuracy (0.51), effectively mitigating
membership inference attacks.
These results provide quantitative evidence that
SecureDyn-FL offers stronger privacy protection than
standard FL methods, complementing the theoretical
security analysis presented earlier.

18

TABLE IV
P RIVACY ATTACK RESULTS : GRADIENT INVERSION AND MEMBERSHIP
INFERENCE .

Method
FedAvg
SecureDyn-FL

Gradient
Inversion
(SSIM)
0.78
0.07

Membership
Inference
Accuracy
0.82
0.51

TABLE V
D ETECTION DELAY COMPARISON BETWEEN S ECURE DYN -FL AND
FL- BASED I OT IDS FRAMEWORKS .

Method
FedAvg
Bhavsar et al. (FL-IDS)
Friha et al. (FELIDS)
PEIoT-DS
SecureDyn-FL (Proposed)

Detection Delay (s) ↓
4.82
4.35
3.96
3.78
2.14

E. Efficiency Evaluation
In addition to accuracy and privacy assessments, we
evaluate the efficiency of SecureDyn-FL in terms of detection delay and communication overhead. Detection
delay refers to the average time required for the global
model to correctly detect an intrusion after its occurrence
in the federated training process. Lower detection delay is
critical for timely response in IoT environments.
We compare the detection delay of SecureDyn-FL
against FedAvg and representative FL-based IoT IDS
frameworks. As shown in Table V, SecureDyn-FL achieves
a significantly lower detection delay while maintaining
high accuracy. This efficiency improvement is attributed
to the framework’s temporal gradient auditing, which
accelerates the detection of poisoned updates, and dynamic
pruning and quantization, which reduce communication
overhead and enable faster model updates.
Table V summarizes the detection delay of SecureDynFL compared to FedAvg and representative FL-based IoT
IDS frameworks. Detection delay measures the average
time taken by each method to correctly detect an intrusion
event after it occurs, which is a critical efficiency metric
for real-time intrusion detection in IoT networks.
As shown in the table, SecureDyn-FL achieves the
lowest detection delay (2.14 s), significantly outperforming FedAvg and other FL-based IDS frameworks. This
improvement is attributed to two key design features of
SecureDyn-FL: (1) the temporal gradient auditing mechanism, which rapidly identifies and filters malicious updates,
thereby allowing the model to respond more quickly to new
attack patterns, and (2) the dynamic pruning and adaptive
quantization strategies, which reduce communication overhead and accelerate the overall training process.
These results demonstrate that SecureDyn-FL not only
delivers superior accuracy and privacy protection but also
achieves high efficiency, making it practical for real-world
IoT intrusion detection deployments where rapid response
is essential.

Fig. 8. Targeted Attack under IID

Fig. 9. Targeted Attack under non IID

IX. C OMPLEXITY & C OMPUTATIONAL A NALYSIS
We provide a detailed computational and communication complexity analysis of SecureDyn-FL, quantifying
overhead at the client, server, and auditor, and showing
that redundancy-aware optimizations, pruning, and quantization enable deployment in resource-constrained IoT
environments. The analysis is structured by system entities,
including client devices, the central server, and the trusted
auditor, and parameterized by the number of participating
clients C and model dimensionality ω. Special attention is
given to the optimization mechanisms, particularly gradient
redundancy elimination, which significantly reduces repetitive computations and transmissions. These enhancements
promote scalability and computational efficiency, thus en-

19

TABLE VI
P ERFORMANCE OF D EFENSE M ETHODS UNDER D IFFERENT P OISONING ATTACKS (S CENARIO 1)

Attack Type

Scenario

Metric

FedAvg

Trimmed Mean

Shield FL

FL trust

FL-Defender

Proposed

None

–

Accuracy
F1
ASR

0.9804
0.9796
–

0.9652
0.9651
–

0.9732
0.9722
–

0.9764
0.9741
–

0.9701
0.9697
–

0.9742
0.9736
–

Accuracy
F1
ASR
Accuracy
F1
ASR
Accuracy
F1
ASR

0.9741
0.9735
0.0185
0.9152
0.9067
0.1297
0.8185
0.8145
0.1467

0.4591
0.6294
1.0000
0.5175
0.0000
1.0000
0.4567
0.6212
0.5045

0.4695
0.6291
1.0000
0.9331
0.9165
0.1247
0.9613
0.9612
0.0345

0.4689
0.6265
1.0000
0.7381
0.6251
0.6210
0.4585
0.6212
0.5034

0.4695
0.6281
1.0000
0.5132
0.0000
1.0000
0.4585
0.6212
0.5034

0.9671
0.9587
0.0072
0.9721
0.9612
0.0720
0.9602
0.9645
0.0512

Benign

Label-Flipping

Attack

Both

Model Scaling

–

Accuracy
F1
ASR

0.4512
0.6235
0.5089

0.4512
0.6414
0.5134

0.4520
0.6345
0.5205

0.4536
0.6358
0.5105

0.9541
0.9685
0.0324

0.9707
0.9695
0.0568

Same Model

–

Accuracy
F1
ASR

0.4541
0.6245
0.5174

0.7185
0.6278
0.2538

0.9456
0.9425
0.0581

0.9702
0.9764
0.0097

0.4967
0.0000
0.4306

0.9701
0.9708
0.0402

Fig. 10. Untargeted-non-IID

Fig. 11. Untargeted-IID

abling deployment in large-scale and resource-constrained
IoT environments. Empirical evidence is provided to support the efficacy of these strategies in mitigating overhead
while preserving model accuracy in adversarial conditions.
Furthermore, the proposed encryption scheme is evaluated
against contemporary privacy-preserving alternatives.

encryption cost is O(γC log2 C). The communication complexity comprises uploading encrypted model parameters
and participating in the initial registration phase, totaling
O(ωC + 2C). These costs are effectively mitigated by
redundancy-aware optimizations, which reduce the volume
of redundant data transmitted from client to server.

a) Computational Overhead at Client Devices

b) Auditor’s Computational and Communication Cost

For each client cj , the dominant computational cost
stems from encrypting local updates, which scales with
the input dimension γ. Across all C clients, the cumulative

The Auditor’s primary tasks include anomaly detection
using GMM and MD, incurring a computational cost of
O(CGδ + Cγ log γ), where G represents the number of

20

TABLE VII
P ERFORMANCE OF D EFENSE M ETHODS UNDER D IFFERENT P OISONING ATTACKS (S CENARIO 2)

Attack Type

Scenario

Metric

FedAvg

Trimmed Mean

Shield FL

FL Trust

FL-Defender

Proposed

None

–

Accuracy
F1
ASR

0.9889
0.9872
–

0.9754
0.9768
–

0.9819
0.9831
–

0.9845
0.9854
–

0.9803
0.9870
–

0.9840
0.9838
–

Accuracy
F1
ASR
Accuracy
F1
ASR
Accuracy
F1
ASR

0.9857
0.9885
0.0241
0.9261
0.9153
0.1365
0.8385
0.8265
0.1558

0.4636
0.6341
1.0000
0.5305
0.0000
1.0000
0.4798
0.6361
0.5163

0.4641
0.6295
1.0000
0.9451
0.9255
0.1351
0.9749
0.9712
0.0339

0.4639
0.6354
1.0000
0.7505
0.6375
0.6130
0.4695
0.6342
0.5169

0.4641
0.6340
1.0000
0.5314
0.0000
1.0000
0.4681
0.6378
0.5181

0.9601
0.9681
0.0061
0.9814
0.9775
0.0738
0.9694
0.9762
0.0421

Benign

Label-Flipping

Attack

Both

Model Scaling

–

Accuracy
F1
ASR

0.4639
0.6373
0.5089

0.4595
0.6291
0.5163

0.4638
0.6325
0.5241

0.4637
0.6347
0.5169

0.9657
0.9702
0.0291

0.9823
0.9761
0.0341

Same Model

–

Accuracy
F1
ASR

0.4601
0.6291
0.5267

0.7254
0.6220
0.2885

0.9441
0.9475
0.0432

0.9862
0.9801
0.0097

0.5163
0.0000
0.4453

0.9901
0.9893
0.0405

TABLE VIII
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON UNDER TARGETED AND U NTARGETED P OISONING ATTACKS FOR IID AND N ON -IID S ETTINGS

Non-IID Data
Model

Targeted Attacks

IID Data

Untargeted Attacks

Targeted Attacks

Untargeted Attacks

T acc

Oracy

F1

T acc

Oracy

F1

T acc

Oracy

F1

T acc

Oracy

F1

Baseline

0.015

0.94

0.04

0.782

0.761

0.62

0.049

0.60

0.47

0.58

0.52

0.55

Proposed

0.995

0.992

0.89

0.989

0.967

0.84

0.997

0.995

0.98

0.992

0.991

0.96

Gaussian clusters and δ the feature space dimensionality.
Communication overhead arises from interaction with both
server and clients, expressed as O(R(Ψ + C)), where R
is the number of audit rounds, Ψ ≤ Θ is the number of
gradient evaluations, and Θ is the total reliability checks.
Selective auditing, enabled by our optimization framework,
reduces both computation and communication loads without sacrificing detection performance.

c) Server-Side Complexity Analysis
The central server aggregates encrypted updates from all
clients with a computational complexity of O(ωC log C).
Its communication cost is defined as O(Φ + CV ), where Φ
and V represent interactions with the Auditor and clients,
respectively. The Auditor filters malicious or redundant
updates before aggregation, thus reducing the server’s
computational load and expediting training convergence.
Quantitative gains in efficiency following adversarial user
elimination are summarized in Tables IX and X. The
Auditor’s overhead is shown to be minimal, especially in
low-threat environments, making it a justifiable trade-off
for enhanced system resilience.

d) Cryptographic Cost and Execution Time
Given the security limitations of legacy key sizes in
Paillier-based cryptosystems, this work adopts larger keys
conforming to current security standards. The trade-off
between computational cost and security is carefully balanced. As key length increases, encryption latency and
memory consumption rise, as demonstrated in Table XI.
Furthermore, as the number of encrypted gradient elements increases, computational overhead scales accordingly. Thus, the model dynamically tunes key size and
batch size to balance privacy with performance, ensuring
robust security with feasible latency.
A. Scalability to Large-Scale IoT Deployments
The proposed framework is primarily designed for crosssilo FL environments, where the number of clients is
relatively small and each participant possesses sufficient
computational resources. Accordingly, our experiments
consider 20 clients, all of which participate in every communication round. However, in practical large-scale IoT
deployments, where thousands of edge devices may be
involved, this full participation model becomes infeasible
due to increased communication overhead and computational burden on the central server. In such scenarios,

21

TABLE IX
C OMPUTATIONAL C OST B EFORE AND A FTER A DVERSARIAL C LIENT R EMOVAL

FL Component

Before Adversary Removal

Client cj

O(γC log2 C)

After Adversary Removal

O(γ(C − A) log2 C−A
)
2

Auditor

O(CGδ + Cγ log γ)

O((C − A)Gδ + (C − A)γ log γ)

Server

O(ωC log C)

O(ω(C − A) log(C − A))

Computational Gain


C
A log2 C−A
A
C (Gδ +
 γ logγ)
A
C
C log C−A

TABLE X
C OMMUNICATION OVERHEAD B EFORE AND A FTER A DVERSARIAL C LIENT R EMOVAL

FL Component

Before Adversary Removal

After Adversary Removal

O(ωC + C 2 )
O(R(Ψ + C))
O(Φ + CV )

O(ω(C − A) + (C − A)2 )
O(R(Ψ + (C − A)))
O(Φ + (C − A)V )

Client cj
Auditor
Server

Communication Reduction

A C+A
C
C 
A
Ψ
C 1 − C
A C−V
C

V

TABLE XI
C RYPTOGRAPHIC O PERATION T IMES ACROSS K EY S IZES

Key Size (bits)

Encryption Time

Decryption Time

Key Generation Time

128
256
512
1024
2048

0.000114 s (8771 ops/s)
0.000399 s (2508 ops/s)
0.002450 s (408 ops/s)
0.013911 s (71 ops/s)
0.098179 s (10 ops/s)

0.000072 s (13919 ops/s)
0.000171 s (5847 ops/s)
0.000783 s (1277 ops/s)
0.004607 s (217 ops/s)
0.028408 s (35 ops/s)

0.001 s
0.030 s
0.030 s
0.200 s
0.430 s

the server must wait for all clients to upload their local
models before aggregation. This dependency introduces
a bottleneck, especially if some clients are slow (i.e.,
stragglers) or unable to complete their local training within
the prescribed time. To address these challenges, a *client
selection mechanism* can be integrated, wherein only a
randomly chosen subset of clients participates in each
communication round. This approach, widely adopted in
FL literature, significantly reduces server load and improves training efficiency. Furthermore, to mitigate the
issue of straggling clients, the system can incorporate
timeout strategies to exclude delayed responses from the
aggregation process. Such client drop strategies prevent
indefinite server blocking and maintain the momentum of
the learning process. Both client selection and straggler
mitigation are active areas of research in scalable federated
learning, and extending our framework to support these
mechanisms is a promising avenue for future work.

that integrates two-dimensional CNNs with Long ShortTerm Memory (LSTM) networks. In this hybrid model,
CNNs extract spatial features while LSTMs model temporal correlations, thereby improving detection performance
on sequential datasets. Similarly, the approach in [72]
introduced a differentially private tensor-based recurrent
neural network tailored for IoT environments. This model
not only demonstrated robust detection capabilities but also
ensured privacy preservation through the integration of differential privacy mechanisms. Both aforementioned models
were deployed in decentralized settings and demonstrate
significant potential for adaptation to FL scenarios. Incorporating such architectures into our federated intrusion detection framework could yield enhanced performance and
improved privacy guarantees. Future research can focus on
the integration and empirical evaluation of these advanced
models within the federated IDS paradigm.
X. C ONCLUSION

B. Incorporating Recent Advances in Neural Architectures
Selecting an appropriate neural network architecture is
crucial for optimizing the performance of IDS. In this
study, we employ a one-dimensional convolutional neural
network (1D-CNN) as the local model due to its proven efficacy in modeling time-series and sequential data typical in
network traffic analysis. While our current model achieves
competitive detection performance, exploring advanced
neural architectures could further enhance its predictive
capability. Recent studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of hybrid architectures in capturing both spatial and
temporal dependencies in sequential data. For instance,
the work in [71] proposed a deep spatiotemporal model

In this study, we proposed SecureDyn-FL, a robust FLbased IDS designed to tackle the challenges of poisoning
attacks and non-IID data distributions in IoT environments.
Our empirical findings confirm that malicious clients can
significantly degrade the performance of federated IDS
models, with the impact being more severe under nonIID data settings, a scenario commonly encountered in
real-world IoT deployments due to data heterogeneity and
imbalance. To mitigate these challenges, we introduced a
personalized FL approach that enables local model customization, allowing each client to adapt to its unique data
distribution while still contributing to the global model.
This enhances resilience against performance degradation

22

caused by non-IID data. Additionally, we implemented a
server-side malicious client detection mechanism that uses
anomaly detection to identify and exclude adversarial updates, protecting the global model from poisoning attacks.
Extensive experiments on the N-BaIoT dataset confirm
the effectiveness of SecureDyn-FL. Evaluated using metrics such as accuracy, F1-score, and detection rate, our
approach consistently outperforms state-of-the-art baseline
methods under both IID and non-IID conditions. Notably,
SecureDyn-FL shows strong robustness against poisoning
attacks, including label-flipping and model update poisoning, while maintaining high detection performance. These
results highlight its practical value for secure and scalable
intrusion detection in heterogeneous IoT networks.
Future work will explore advanced neural architectures
(e.g., graph neural networks and attention mechanisms)
to capture IoT data complexities, scalable client selection strategies (e.g., reinforcement learning methods), and
enhanced attack detection techniques incorporating differential privacy and secure multi-party computation. In
addition, we recognize that blockchain and distributed
ledger technologies (DLTs) can provide immutable logging of model updates, decentralized trust management,
and verifiable audit trails. Integrating such mechanisms
with SecureDyn-FL represents a promising direction to
further strengthen the trustworthiness and accountability
of federated learning in IoT networks. Collectively, these
efforts aim to improve the adaptability, robustness, and
transparency of SecureDyn-FL in large-scale federated
environments.
R EFERENCES
[1] M. Shahjalal, W. Kim, W. Khalid, S. Moon, M. Khan, S. Liu, S. Lim,
E. Kim, D.-W. Yun, J. Lee, W.-C. Lee, S.-H. Hwang, D. Kim, J.-W.
Lee, H. Yu, Y. Sung, and Y. M. Jang, “Enabling technologies for
AI empowered 6G massive radio access networks,” ICT Express,
vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 31–355, Jun. 2023.
[2] H. Yu, H. Lee, and H. Jeon, “What is 5G? Emerging 5G mobile
services and network requirements,” Sustainability, vol. 9, no. 10,
p. 1848, 2017.
[3] Y. B. Zikria, H. Yu, M. K. Afzal, M. H. Rehmani, and O. Hahm, “Internet of things (IoT): Operating system, applications and protocols
design, and validation techniques,” Future Generation Computer
Systems, vol. 88, pp. 699–706, 2018.
[4] M. A. Siddiqi, H. Yu, and J. Joung, “5G ultra-reliable low-latency
communication implementation challenges and operational issues
with iot devices,” Electronics, vol. 8, no. 9, p. 981, 2019.
[5] I.-G. Lee, D. B. Kim, J. Choi, H. Park, S.-K. Lee, J. Cho, and
H. Yu, “Wifi halow for long-range and low-power internet of things:
System on chip development and performance evaluation,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 101–107, 2021.
[6] A. Musaddiq, Y. B. Zikria, O. Hahm, H. Yu, A. K. Bashir, and S. W.
Kim, “A survey on resource management in iot operating systems,”
IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 8459–8482, 2018.
[7] J. Hojlo, “Future of industry ecosystems: Shared data and insights,”
IDC Ind. Rep, 2021.
[8] Q.-u.-A. Arshad, W. Z. Khan, F. Azam, M. K. K. Khan, H. Yu, and
Y. B. Zikria, “Blockchain-based decentralized trust management in
iot: systems, requirements and challenges,” Complex & Intelligent
Systems, vol. 9, pp. 6155—-6176, 2023.
[9] M. Antonakakis, T. April, M. Bailey, M. Bernhard, E. Bursztein,
J. Cochran, Z. Durumeric, J. A. Halderman, L. Invernizzi, M. Kallitsis et al., “Understanding the mirai botnet,” in 26th USENIX security
symposium (USENIX Security 17), 2017, pp. 1093–1110.
[10] J. Wu, S. A. Haider, H. Yu, M. Irshad, M. Soni, M. K. Bhadla, and
Y. B. Zikria, “An intelligent iot intrusion detection system using
heinit-wgan and sso-bnmcnn based multivariate feature analysis,”
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, vol. 127, p.
107132, 2024.

[11] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A.
y Arcas, “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from
decentralized data,” in Artificial intelligence and statistics. PMLR,
2017, pp. 1273–1282.
[12] S. Agrawal, S. Sarkar, O. Aouedi, G. Yenduri, K. Piamrat,
M. Alazab, S. Bhattacharya, P. K. R. Maddikunta, and T. R.
Gadekallu, “Federated learning for intrusion detection system: Concepts, challenges and future directions,” Computer Communications,
vol. 195, pp. 346–361, 2022.
[13] O. Friha, M. A. Ferrag, L. Shu, L. Maglaras, K.-K. R. Choo,
and M. Nafaa, “Felids: Federated learning-based intrusion detection
system for agricultural internet of things,” Journal of Parallel and
Distributed Computing, vol. 165, pp. 17–31, 2022.
[14] V. Kelli, V. Argyriou, T. Lagkas, G. Fragulis, E. Grigoriou, and
P. Sarigiannidis, “Ids for industrial applications: A federated learning
approach with active personalization,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 20, p.
6743, 2021.
[15] M. A. Ferrag, O. Friha, L. Maglaras, H. Janicke, and L. Shu,
“Federated deep learning for cyber security in the internet of things:
Concepts, applications, and experimental analysis,” IEEe Access,
vol. 9, pp. 138 509–138 542, 2021.
[16] V. Mothukuri, R. M. Parizi, S. Pouriyeh, Y. Huang, A. Dehghantanha, and G. Srivastava, “A survey on security and privacy of
federated learning,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 115,
pp. 619–640, 2021.
[17] M. Fang, X. Cao, J. Jia, and N. Gong, “Local model poisoning
attacks to {Byzantine-Robust} federated learning,” in 29th USENIX
security symposium (USENIX Security 20), 2020, pp. 1605–1622.
[18] Y. Chang, K. Zhang, J. Gong, and H. Qian, “Privacy-preserving
federated learning via functional encryption, revisited,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 18, pp. 1855–
1869, 2023.
[19] V. Rey, P. M. S. Sánchez, A. H. Celdrán, and G. Bovet, “Federated
learning for malware detection in iot devices,” Computer Networks,
vol. 204, p. 108693, 2022.
[20] Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, D. Guo, L. Yao, and Z. Li, “Secfednids:
Robust defense for poisoning attack against federated learning-based
network intrusion detection system,” Future Generation Computer
Systems, vol. 134, pp. 154–169, 2022.
[21] J. Bae, W. Khalid, A. Lee, H. Lee, S. Noh, and H. Yu, “Overview of
RIS-enabled secure transmission in 6G wireless networks,” Digital
Communications and Networks, vol. 10, pp. 1553–1565, 2024.
[22] M. R. A. Ruku, M. Ibrahim, A. Badrudduza, I. S. Ansari, W. Khalid,
and H. Yu, “Effects of co-channel interference on RIS empowered
wireless networks amid multiple eavesdropping attempts,” ICT Express, vol. 10, pp. 491–497, 2024.
[23] C. Xu and G. Neglia, “What else is leaked when eavesdropping
federated learning?” in CCS workshop Privacy Preserving Machine
Learning (PPML), 2021.
[24] I. Driouich, C. Xu, G. Neglia, F. Giroire, and E. Thomas, “A
novel model-based attribute inference attack in federated learning,”
in FL-NeurIPS’22-Federated Learning: Recent Advances and New
Challenges workshop in Conjunction with NeurIPS 2022, 2022.
[25] L. Wang, S. Xu, X. Wang, and Q. Zhu, “Eavesdrop the composition
proportion of training labels in federated learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1910.06044, 2019.
[26] W. Wan, J. Lu, S. Hu, L. Y. Zhang, and X. Pei, “Shielding federated
learning: A new attack approach and its defense,” in 2021 IEEE
wireless communications and networking conference (wcnc). IEEE,
2021, pp. 1–7.
[27] G. Xu, X. Han, S. Xu, T. Zhang, H. Li, X. Huang, and R. H.
Deng, “Hercules: Boosting the performance of privacy-preserving
federated learning,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure
Computing, vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 4418–4433, 2022.
[28] L. Zhao, Q. Wang, Q. Zou, Y. Zhang, and Y. Chen, “Privacypreserving collaborative deep learning with unreliable participants,”
IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 15,
pp. 1486–1500, 2019.
[29] G. Chandu, T. Karthik, and B. Parag, “Federated learning for
distributed iot security: A privacy-preserving approach to intrusion
detection,” IEEE Access, 2025.
[30] J. Li, X. Tong, J. Liu, and L. Cheng, “An efficient federated learning
system for network intrusion detection,” IEEE Systems Journal,
vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 2455–2464, 2023.
[31] F. Liu, Z. Zheng, Y. Shi, Y. Tong, and Y. Zhang, “A survey on
federated learning: a perspective from multi-party computation,”
Frontiers of Computer Science, vol. 18, no. 1, p. 181336, 2024.
[32] Y. Guo, L. Li, Z. Zheng, H. Yun, R. Zhang, X. Chang, and Z. Gao,
“Efficient and privacy-preserving federated learning based on full
homomorphic encryption,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.11519, 2024.

23

[33] A. G. Sébert, R. Sirdey, O. Stan, and C. Gouy-Pailler, “Protecting
data from all parties: Combining fhe and dp in federated learning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.04330, 2022.
[34] G. Xu, G. Li, S. Guo, T. Zhang, and H. Li, “Privacy-preserving decentralized deep learning with multiparty homomorphic encryption,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.04604, 2022.
[35] S. Sav, A. Diaa, A. Pyrgelis, J.-P. Bossuat, and J.-P. Hubaux,
“Privacy-preserving federated recurrent neural networks,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2207.13947, 2022.
[36] X. Zhang, F. Li, Z. Zhang, Q. Li, C. Wang, and J. Wu, “Enabling
execution assurance of federated learning at untrusted participants,”
in IEEE INFOCOM 2020-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE, 2020, pp. 1877–1886.
[37] T. Gehlhar, F. Marx, T. Schneider, A. Suresh, T. Wehrle, and
H. Yalame, “Safefl: Mpc-friendly framework for private and robust
federated learning,” in 2023 IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops
(SPW). IEEE, 2023, pp. 69–76.
[38] M. Asif, S. Naz, F. Ali, A. Salam, F. Amin, F. Ullah, and A. Alabrah,
“Advanced zero-shot learning (AZSL) framework for secure model
generalization in federated learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp.
184 393–184 407, 2024.
[39] B. Biggio, B. Nelson, and P. Laskov, “Poisoning attacks against
support vector machines,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1206.6389, 2012.
[40] E. Bagdasaryan, A. Veit, Y. Hua, D. Estrin, and V. Shmatikov,
“How to backdoor federated learning,” in International conference
on artificial intelligence and statistics. PMLR, 2020, pp. 2938–
2948.
[41] G. Xu, H. Li, S. Liu, K. Yang, and X. Lin, “Verifynet: Secure and
verifiable federated learning,” IEEE Transactions on Information
Forensics and Security, vol. 15, pp. 911–926, 2019.
[42] X. Liu, H. Li, G. Xu, Z. Chen, X. Huang, and R. Lu, “Privacyenhanced federated learning against poisoning adversaries,” IEEE
Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 16, pp.
4574–4588, 2021.
[43] Z. Ma, J. Ma, Y. Miao, Y. Li, and R. H. Deng, “Shieldfl: Mitigating
model poisoning attacks in privacy-preserving federated learning,”
IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 17,
pp. 1639–1654, 2022.
[44] X. Cao, M. Fang, J. Liu, and N. Z. Gong, “Fltrust: Byzantinerobust federated learning via trust bootstrapping,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2012.13995, 2020.
[45] P. Blanchard, E. M. El Mhamdi, R. Guerraoui, and J. Stainer,
“Machine learning with adversaries: Byzantine tolerant gradient descent,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 30,
2017.
[46] S. Shen, S. Tople, and P. Saxena, “Auror: Defending against poisoning attacks in collaborative deep learning systems,” in Proceedings
of the 32nd annual conference on computer security applications,
2016, pp. 508–519.
[47] N. M. Jebreel and J. Domingo-Ferrer, “Fl-defender: Combating
targeted attacks in federated learning,” Knowledge-Based Systems,
vol. 260, p. 110178, 2023.
[48] W. Gill, A. Anwar, and M. A. Gulzar, “Feddefender: Backdoor
attack defense in federated learning,” in Proceedings of the 1st
International Workshop on Dependability and Trustworthiness of
Safety-Critical Systems with Machine Learned Components, 2023,
pp. 6–9.
[49] P. Erbil and M. E. Gursoy, “Defending against targeted poisoning
attacks in federated learning,” in 2022 IEEE 4th International
Conference on Trust, Privacy and Security in Intelligent Systems,
and Applications (TPS-ISA). IEEE, 2022, pp. 198–207.
[50] Z. Zhang, X. Cao, J. Jia, and N. Z. Gong, “Fldetector: Defending
federated learning against model poisoning attacks via detecting
malicious clients,” in Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGKDD conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, 2022, pp. 2545–
2555.
[51] M. H. Bhavsar, Y. B. Bekele, K. Roy, J. C. Kelly, and D. Limbrick,
“Fl-ids: Federated learning-based intrusion detection system using
edge devices for transportation iot,” IEEe Access, vol. 12, pp.
52 215–52 226, 2024.
[52] R. Akinie, N. K. Gyimah, M. Bhavsar, and J. Kelly, “Fine-tuning
federated learning-based intrusion detection systems for transportation iot,” in SoutheastCon 2025. IEEE, 2025, pp. 1155–1161.
[53] D. Javeed, M. S. Saeed, M. Adil, P. Kumar, and A. Jolfaei, “A
federated learning-based zero trust intrusion detection system for
internet of things,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 162, p. 103540, 2024.
[54] M. M. Rashid, S. U. Khan, F. Eusufzai, M. A. Redwan, S. R.
Sabuj, and M. Elsharief, “A federated learning-based approach
for improving intrusion detection in industrial internet of things
networks,” Network, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 158–179, 2023.

[55] P. Ruzafa-Alcázar, P. Fernández-Saura, E. Mármol-Campos,
A. González-Vidal, J. L. Hernández-Ramos, J. Bernal-Bernabe, and
A. F. Skarmeta, “Intrusion detection based on privacy-preserving
federated learning for the industrial iot,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1145–1154, 2021.
[56] N. Hamdi, “Federated learning-based intrusion detection system for
internet of things,” International Journal of Information Security,
vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 1937–1948, 2023.
[57] S. D. Azeez, M. Ilyas, and I. M. Bako, “Federated learning for
privacy-preserving intrusion detection in iot networks,” in 2024 International Congress on Human-Computer Interaction, Optimization
and Robotic Applications (HORA). IEEE, 2024, pp. 1–7.
[58] S. A. Mahmud, N. Islam, Z. Islam, Z. Rahman, and S. T. Mehedi,
“Privacy-preserving federated learning-based intrusion detection
technique for cyber-physical systems,” Mathematics, vol. 12, no. 20,
p. 3194, 2024.
[59] Z. Abou El Houda, H. Moudoud, and L. Khoukhi, “Secure and
efficient federated learning for robust intrusion detection in iot networks,” in GLOBECOM 2023-2023 IEEE Global Communications
Conference. IEEE, 2023, pp. 2668–2673.
[60] A. Yazdinejad, A. Dehghantanha, H. Karimipour, G. Srivastava, and
R. M. Parizi, “A robust privacy-preserving federated learning model
against model poisoning attacks,” IEEE Transactions on Information
Forensics and Security, vol. 19, pp. 6693–6708, 2024.
[61] Y. Miao, X. Yan, X. Li, S. Xu, X. Liu, H. Li, and R. H. Deng, “Rfed:
Robustness-enhanced privacy-preserving federated learning against
poisoning attack,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and
Security, vol. 19, pp. 5814–5827, 2024.
[62] J. Wu, F. Luo, T. Sun, H. Wang, and W. Zhang, “Privacypreserving federated learning scheme with mitigating model poisoning attacks: Vulnerabilities and countermeasures,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2506.23622, 2025.
[63] S. Sav, A. Pyrgelis, J. R. Troncoso-Pastoriza, D. Froelicher, J.P. Bossuat, J. S. Sousa, and J.-P. Hubaux, “Poseidon: Privacypreserving federated neural network learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.00349, 2020.
[64] A. Salam, M. Abrar, F. Ullah, I. A. Khan, F. Amin, and G. S. Choi,
“Efficient data collaboration using multi-party privacy preserving
machine learning framework,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 138 151–
138 164, 2023.
[65] Z. Ashraf, Z. Mahmood, and M. Iqbal, “Lightweight privacypreserving remote user authentication and key agreement protocol
for next-generation iot-based smart healthcare,” Future Internet,
vol. 15, no. 12, p. 386, 2023.
[66] I. A. Soomro, S. J. Hussain, Z. Ashraf, M. M. Alnfiai, N. N.
Alotaibi et al., “Lightweight privacy-preserving federated deep
intrusion detection for industrial cyber-physical system,” Journal of
Communications and Networks, vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 632–649, 2024.
[67] Z. Ashraf, A. Sohail, and M. Yousaf, “Robust and lightweight
symmetric key exchange algorithm for next-generation ioe,” Internet
of Things, vol. 22, p. 100703, 2023.
[68] H. Zhu, R. Wang, Y. Jin, K. Liang, and J. Ning, “Distributed additive
encryption and quantization for privacy preserving federated deep
learning,” Neurocomputing, vol. 463, pp. 309–327, 2021.
[69] Y. Meidan, M. Bohadana, Y. Mathov, Y. Mirsky, A. Shabtai,
D. Breitenbacher, and Y. Elovici, “N-baiot—network-based detection of iot botnet attacks using deep autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive
Computing, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 12–22, 2018.
[70] A. Alsaedi, N. Moustafa, Z. Tari, A. Mahmood, and A. Anwar,
“Ton iot telemetry dataset: A new generation dataset of iot and iiot
for data-driven intrusion detection systems,” Ieee Access, vol. 8, pp.
165 130–165 150, 2020.
[71] S. Tsokov, M. Lazarova, and A. Aleksieva-Petrova, “A hybrid
spatiotemporal deep model based on cnn and lstm for air pollution
prediction,” Sustainability, vol. 14, no. 9, p. 5104, 2022.
[72] J. Feng, L. T. Yang, B. Ren, D. Zou, M. Dong, and S. Zhang,
“Tensor recurrent neural network with differential privacy,” IEEE
Transactions on Computers, vol. 73, no. 3, pp. 683–693, 2023.

24

Imtiaz Ali Soomro is pursuing a PhD in Electrical and Computer Engineering at Sir Syed
CASE Institute of Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan. He obtained his B.E. in Telecommunications from Hamdard University, Islamabad,
Pakistan 2010. He earned his M.S. in Electrical
Engineering with a specialization in Telecom
and Networking from COMSATS University,
Islamabad, Pakistan, in 2012. His research interests are focused on the application of Federated Learning for IoT, wireless networks, and
cybersecurity, particularly on privacy-preserving technologies and secure
communication in distributed systems. He is also an IEEE member,
actively contributing to the research community through his innovative
work in machine learning, IoT, and cybersecurity.

Hamood ur Rehman Khan obtained his B.S.
degree in electronics engineering from Ghulam
Ishaq Khan Institute of Technology in 2000,
M.S. degree from the University of Michigan in
2005 and Ph.D. degree from King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals in 2019, both in
electrical engineering. He was a Senior Member
Technical Staff at the Center for Advanced Research and Engineering (CARE), jointly holding
appointment as a an Adjunct Professor with
the Computer Science Department at Sir SyedCASE-Institute of Technology. At CARE he has led projects ranging
from IoT Platform-as-a-Service systems, cyber-security products, and
advanced VLSI based AI platforms for Large Language Model (LLM)
inference. Currently, he is an Assistant Professor in the ECE Department
of Habib University, teaching various courses pertaining to Electrical and
Computer Engineering majors, including, computer architecture, signals
and systems, digital communications and statistical inference. In the past,
during the period 2000-2003 he was with Avaz Networks Inc, California
as a Senior VLSI Design Engineer working on high-density Voice over
IP (VoIP) System-on-Chips for gateway media switches. His primary
research interests are information theory, signal processing and PHY layer
communications for networked systems like WSNs and IoTs.

Syed Jawad Hussain is an Associate Professor
and Chairperson at the Sir Syed Case Institute
of Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan. He holds a
PhD in Computer Science from Massey University, New Zealand, focusing on developing highdefinition video quality experience models. His
research interests include Multimedia Communication Networks, Machine Learning, Quality
of Service (QoS), Quality of Experience (QoE),
Data and Network Security, and Statistical Modeling. Dr. Hussain has extensive experience in
academia and industry, having held various leadership roles, including
Head of Department positions at institutions in Pakistan and abroad. He
has worked on numerous research and consultancy projects, focusing
on machine learning, data security, and multimedia communications. Dr.
Hussain has published extensively in prestigious journals and conferences,
contributing significantly to the field of computer science.

Adeel Iqbal is an Assistant Professor in the
School of Computer Science and Engineering at
Yeungnam University, South Korea. He specializes in Electrical Engineering. He completed his
Bachelor’s degree at the FUUAST Islamabad,
and later earned his Master’s and Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering from COMSATS University
Islamabad. Adeel’s research encompasses nextgeneration cellular networks such as cognitive
radio, IoT, D2D, and vehicular systems, along
with work in WSNs, machine learning, image
processing, and green and renewable energy.

Waqas Khalid (Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. degree in electronics engineering from the
GIK Institute of Engineering Sciences and Technology, KPK, Pakistan, in 2011, the M.S. degree
in information and communication engineering
from Inha University, Incheon, South Korea,
in 2016, and the Ph.D. degree in information
and communication engineering from Yeungnam University, Gyeongsan, South Korea, in
2019. He is currently an Assistant Professor
with the Department of Electrical and Electronic
Engineering, University of Nottingham Ningbo China (UNNC), Ningbo,
China. Previously, he served as a Research Professor at the Institute of
Industrial Technology, Korea University, Sejong, South Korea, where he
was also the recipient of a National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF)
research grant from Jun. 2022 to May 2025. His research interests include
physical layer modeling, signal processing, and emerging technologies for
5G/6G networks, including reconfigurable intelligent surfaces, physicallayer security, non-orthogonal multiple access, UAV communications, and
the IoTs.

Heejung Yu (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. degree in radio science and engineering from Korea University, Seoul, South Korea,
in 1999, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in
electrical engineering from the Korea Advanced
Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon,
South Korea, in 2001 and 2011, respectively.
From 2001 to 2012, he was with the Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute,
Daejeon, and from 2012 to 2019, he was with
Yeungman University, Gyeongsan, South Korea.
He is currently a Professor at the Department of Electronics and Information Engineering, Korea University, Sejong, South Korea. His research
interests include statistical signal processing and communication theory.

