arXiv:2601.04930v2 [cs.DC] 30 Jun 2026

Privacy-Preserving Federated Averaging with Byzantine
Aggregators in Asynchronous Networks
Antonella Del Pozzo

Achille Desreumaux

Mathieu Gestin

Université Paris Saclay, CEA LIST
France

Université Paris Saclay, CEA LIST
France

Université Paris Saclay, CEA LIST
France

Alexandre Rapetti

Sara Tucci

Université Paris Saclay, CEA LIST
France

Université Paris Saclay, CEA LIST
France

Abstract
Federated Learning requires secure aggregation to prevent gradient
leakage, yet existing protocols suffer from key limitations: they
assume synchrony, require heavy peer-to-peer coordination, and
do not tolerate aggregators that halt or omit messages. These constraints make current secure aggregation schemes impractical in
large-scale, unreliable distributed settings.
To overcome these limitations, we introduce a new secure aggregation protocol that operates in fully asynchronous networks —
where messages may be arbitrarily delayed — and tolerates fully
Byzantine aggregators that are capable of arbitrary deviations including premature halting. Our design combines several key mechanisms: clustering clients under verifiable coordinators, lightweight
LWE-based masking (with masking components distributed across
aggregators), and differential privacy applied to both intermediary
and final aggregated models. We further propose verifiable shuffling of clients across clusters, which prevents any client from being
systematically excluded by a Byzantine coordinator, and a fair inclusion mechanism that ensures the inclusion of straggling clients
whose messages are late. The protocol eliminates all client-to-client
communication, and its communication overhead scales only with
the number of aggregators—never with the number of clients. It
also ensures equal representation of clients across rounds, avoiding
bias and preventing unbalanced privacy risks among clients.
Overall, our protocol provides the first secure aggregation primitive that is both privacy-preserving and robust to fully Byzantine
behavior in asynchronous networks, closing the gap between prior
secure aggregation assumptions and real-world distributed systems.

Keywords
Asynchronous communications, Federated averaging, Fairness

1

Introduction

Federated Learning (FL) is a paradigm where multiple clients collaboratively train a machine learning model while keeping their
data local. A central aggregator collects, at each training round, the
local model updates, called gradients, to compute a global model
that is then redistributed to clients for the next round. Training
proceeds through successive rounds until convergence.
The main advantage of FL lies in preserving data privacy, since
raw data never leaves the clients. However, recent studies have
revealed that gradient reconstruction attacks [46, 47, 49], where an
adversary corrupts the central aggregator or intercepts gradients

exchanged in the network, can reconstruct original data samples
used during training.
To mitigate such privacy risks, several approaches have been
proposed, including local differential privacy [1], homomorphic
encryption [16, 43], and secure aggregation [10]. Each of these
techniques, however, comes with important limitations. Local differential privacy injects noise into gradients, but when applied
at the granularity of individual updates, the amount of noise required to ensure meaningful privacy substantially degrades global
model accuracy. Homomorphic encryption enables computation
over encrypted gradients, yet its computational and communication
overhead remains prohibitive for large-scale models or resourceconstrained clients. Secure aggregation avoids these costs because
masking is lightweight and ciphertexts retain the size of the input.
Still, most secure aggregation protocols [8, 10, 40] require extensive
peer-to-peer coordination among clients, increasing per-client message complexity and creating mutual dependencies. Approaches
that reduce this communication burden continue to rely on serverside computations that constitute a single point of failure [41].
Indeed, to the best of our knowledge, existing secure aggregation
protocols do not account for aggregators that may experience availability faults and halt the protocol at arbitrary points. Network
assumptions pose a further limitation. Many protocols assume synchrony—i.e., bounded message delays—or do not explicitly model
the network. In contrast, realistic deployments must operate in
asynchronous settings, where message delays may be arbitrary,
possibly under adversarial influence. In such settings, slow or straggling clients may be systematically excluded from the aggregation,
while fast clients may become disproportionately represented, potentially biasing the aggregated model (especially in the presence
of non-independent and identically distributed (non-i.i.d.) data) or
exposing fast clients to increased privacy risks.
In this paper, we present a new secure aggregation protocol
that extends the state of the art to operate in asynchronous networks and tolerate fully Byzantine aggregators. Here, fully means
that aggregators may deviate in truly arbitrary ways: not only by
attempting to illicitly reveal private information or corrupt the
aggregated model (as in standard secure aggregation), but also by
halting during protocol execution or selectively omitting messages.
Importantly, our goal is to achieve a synchronous federated
learning scheme, in which training proceeds in rounds. Although a
fully asynchronous federated learning scheme might appear more
natural in an asynchronous network [50], it is not attractive in

,,

Antonella Del Pozzo, Achille Desreumaux, Mathieu Gestin, Alexandre Rapetti, and Sara Tucci

our setting. Prior work has shown that asynchronous FL can reduce model utility and accuracy, especially in the presence of stale
updates, straggler clients, non-i.i.d. data, and heterogeneous participants [31, 48]. Moreover, recent empirical evidence suggests
that asynchronous FL may also exacerbate privacy and fairness
disparities across clients [31]. We therefore adopt a different approach: although the network is fully asynchronous, training is still
organized into well-defined rounds. In other words, our approach
aims to preserve the benefits of synchronous FL while operating
over asynchronous communications.
This approach leverages a distributed architecture, where in
each round clients are partitioned into clusters, and each cluster is
verifiably assigned to a specific proxy aggregator, called a coordinator. Each client prepares its model update by masking it using
lightweight Learning With Errors (LWE) techniques [40] and generating shares of the mask, one for each aggregator. Each client
then encrypts these shares under the aggregators’ keys and sends
the encrypted shares to its coordinator, which redistributes them
to the corresponding aggregators. The aggregators then collaboratively perform verifiable secure aggregation using the received
shares: each coordinator securely computes the aggregated model
for its cluster, assisted by the shares previously distributed to other
aggregators. In addition, each client contributes a small differential
privacy (DP) noise component that remains after aggregation and
provides privacy guarantees for the aggregated model.
In our design, clients do not communicate with each other, and
the communication overhead is proportional mainly to the number
of aggregators—a quantity we expect to be significantly smaller
than the number of clients.
A key aspect of our solution is the verifiable shuffling of clusters:
at every round, clients are randomly reassigned to coordinators.
This prevents any client from being systematically paired with a
Byzantine coordinator that might drop its updates or omit returning
the aggregated model. Moreover, because each cluster has a single
coordinator that serializes the input shares for that cluster, there is
no need to run a Byzantine Fault-Tolerant (BFT) consensus protocol [12, 17], which would otherwise be required when client shares
are sent directly to multiple potentially Byzantine aggregators [9].
Avoiding BFT consensus is essential both to prevent high communication overhead and to ensure that our protocol operates correctly
in an asynchronous network. Importantly, periodic shuffling is also
key to convergence: by reassigning clients to different aggregators
at each round, updates are gradually mixed across clusters, allowing the global model to align even though aggregators do not run
consensus to produce a unique model at each round.
The second key aspect of our solution is the inclusion of straggling
clients. Our inclusion mechanism at the aggregator side increases
the likelihood of choosing clients that have been silent in previous
rounds, ensuring that every participant is equally represented in
expectation. Crucially, both the shuffling and inclusion mechanisms
are designed to be non-manipulable by Byzantine aggregators.
Overall, our solution enables, for the first time, privacy preserving and fair federated learning in asynchronous networks with
potentially fully Byzantine aggregators, closing a long-standing
gap between the assumptions made in secure aggregation and the
realities of large-scale, unreliable distributed systems.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2, presents building
blocks. Section 3, studies state-of-the-art privacy preserving federated learning protocols. Section 4 details the model and the formal
problem statement of this paper. Section 5, presents an overview of
our protocol. Section 6 details the working of the protocol. Finally,
performances of our protocol are evaluated and compared to the
state of the art in Section 7.

2

Background

Federated Learning with FedAvg. We base our protocol on FedAvg [28] as, in the context of heterogeneous data, it is the most
efficient building block to create a privacy preserving Federated
Learning (FL) mechanism [26, 34]. FedAvg works by letting a set
of 𝑛𝑐 clients collaboratively train a global model 𝑤 ∈ R𝑑 under the
coordination of a central server, without sharing their raw data.
Each client 𝑐𝑖 holds a private dataset of size 𝑚𝑖 and defines a local objective function 𝑓𝑖 : R𝑑 → R. The global learning task is to
minimize the aggregated objective:
min 𝑓 (𝑤) =
𝑤

𝑛
𝑐
∑︁

𝑚𝑖
𝑓𝑖 (𝑤),
𝑀
𝑖=1

𝑀=

𝑛
𝑐
∑︁

𝑚𝑖 .

𝑖=1

FL proceeds in communication rounds. At each round 𝜏, the
server selects a subset C𝜏 of 𝑘 ≤ 𝑛𝑐 clients and sends them the
current global model 𝑤 𝜏 . Each selected client 𝑐𝑖 performs 𝐸 local
epochs of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) on its private data.
During SGD, the client processes its dataset in mini-batches of size
𝐵, where 𝐵 denotes the number of samples used to compute one
stochastic gradient estimate.
After running SGD, client 𝑖 obtains an updated local model 𝑤𝑖𝜏
and sends the update 𝑔𝑖𝜏 = 𝑤 𝜏 − 𝑤𝑖𝜏 to the server, which aggregates
the received updates using the FedAvg rule:
∑︁
∑︁ 𝑚𝑖
𝑔𝑖𝜏 ,
𝑚 C𝜏 =
𝑚𝑖 .
𝑤 𝜏+1 = 𝑤 𝜏 −
𝜏
𝑚
C
𝑐 ∈ C𝜏
𝑐 ∈ C𝜏
𝑖

𝑖

Differential Privacy. Differential Privacy (DP) [18] makes it possible to publish statistics about a dataset while preserving individuals’
privacy. DP relies on the notion of adjacent datasets. Two datasets
are said to be adjacent if their data differ by exactly one element. The
idea is to build a mechanism that transforms a dataset’s statistics in
a way that two adjacent datasets’ statistics are indistinguishable, up
to an 𝜖 factor, usually by injecting controlled noise. The original DP
definition, called 𝜖-DP, was given for a parameter 𝜖, a mechanism
M : R → S and two adjacent datasets 𝑅1 and 𝑅2 as:
𝑃𝑟 [M(𝑅1 ) ∈ 𝑆] ≤ 𝑒 𝜖 𝑃𝑟 [M(𝑅2 ) ∈ 𝑆], ∀𝑆 ∈ S.
In this framework, the parameter 𝜖 is interpreted as a privacy budget: it quantifies the maximum privacy loss that the mechanism is
allowed to incur. A smaller budget corresponds to stronger privacy
guarantees, while a larger budget permits more information leakage. When a DP mechanism is applied repeatedly, as is the case in
federated learning, where such mechanisms run across multiple
training rounds, the privacy loss accumulates over time and must
remain within the overall budget.
Privacy preserving FL systems use a mechanism based on Gaussian noise to provide privacy. However, proving 𝜖-DP guarantees of
this mechanism is deemed impractical. For this reason, federated

Privacy-Preserving Federated Averaging with Byzantine Aggregators in Asynchronous Networks

learning systems do not rely on plain 𝜖-DP for privacy accounting, but instead use (𝛼, 𝜖)-Rényi DP [30] or (𝛼, 𝜖)-RDP. 1 In the
RDP framework, each invocation of a mechanism incurs a privacy
cost 𝜖 (𝛼) at a given Rényi order 𝛼. This cost plays the role of a
privacy budget for that round. Because RDP composes additively,
the total privacy budget consumed after 𝑇 rounds is simply the
sum of the individual costs. Moreover, when privacy is enforced
through Gaussian noise with variance 𝜎 2 , RDP cost admits a simple
closed-form expression for 𝑇 rounds:𝜖 (𝛼) = 𝛼 · 𝑇 /2𝜎 2 .
Homomorphic commitments. A commitment scheme is a cryptographic scheme that makes it possible to create an element 𝐶
from a value 𝑣 that is binding to 𝑣 while hiding the value. It has
an operation Commit(𝑣) which outputs the commitment 𝐶 to the
value 𝑣. The scheme also supports an operation Open(𝐶, 𝑣) that
outputs 1 if 𝐶 is a commitment to 𝑣. We require that these commitments are additionally homomorphic, i.e., we have an operation
⊕ such that Commit(𝑣) ⊕ Commit(𝑣 ′ ) = Commit(𝑣 + 𝑣 ′ ). Such
commitment schemes can be built using modular exponentiation
in groups where solving the discrete logarithm is hard (as in [38]),
or discrete logarithm-based polynomial commitments [25].
Secret Sharing. Secret Sharing (SS) is a mechanism used to share
a value in a privacy preserving manner. A (𝑥, 𝑦)-SS scheme has
2 operations: SS.Share and SS.Recover. SS.Share takes an input 𝑧
and outputs 𝑥 “shares”. An adversary that is given at most 𝑦 − 1
shares cannot learn anything about 𝑧. However, given any 𝑦 ≤ 𝑥
shares, 𝑧 can be reconstructed using the SS.Recover operation. We
use additionally homomorphic SS schemes. They make it possible
to sum shares and reconstruct the sum of those shares without
revealing the individual unsummed values to any participant. We
use the ⊕ operator to denote this homomorphic addition.
Furthermore, in Section 6.4, we use a Publicly Verifiable, Additionally Homomorphic SS (PVAHSS) scheme. A PVAHSS scheme
is an SS scheme with verifiability properties. We require any actor
to be able to use an algorithm PVAHSS.Verify to verify that the
reconstruction is executed honestly. The PVAHSS.Verify algorithm
takes as input a proof built during the creation of the shares and
outputs True if the reconstruction of the secret value was lawful.
We further require that the proof is additionally homomorphic to
enable verification of the reconstruction of the sum of shares. Finally, we require the ability to detect a misbehaving actor that sums
wrong shares thanks to a PVAHSS.PartialVerify function. Some
prior works proposed some of these features [13, 15, 22, 33, 42], but
they either do not provide all features, or are designed for any type
of computations rather than additions, and are thus too complex
for our usage. To solve this problem, we propose to use additionally
homomorphic commitment schemes for both proofs.

3

Related Work

Preamble. In the FL literature, the term Byzantine is often used
with different scopes. For the sake of clarity, in our review of related work, we distinguish four notions. In secure aggregation,
adversaries target confidentiality; we call them privacy-Byzantine
1 RDP measures privacy loss using the Rényi divergence, parameterized by an order 𝛼 >
1 that controls the sensitivity of the divergence. Importantly, RDP guarantees bound
privacy loss in expectation, while 𝜖 -DP mechanism provides a uniform guarantee.

,,

adversaries. They may deviate by colluding to recover individual
updates or by manipulating masking shares. In verifiable secure
aggregation, adversaries may also target integrity; we call them
integrity-Byzantine adversaries. For instance, they may deviate by
submitting malformed vectors or computing incorrect aggregation
shares. When adversaries target the model by submitting syntactically well-formed updates that nevertheless sabotage convergence,
e.g., poisoned gradients or models, we call them model-Byzantine
adversaries. Fully Byzantine adversaries, on the other hand, strictly
subsume the above notions and also capture attacks against availability. They may deviate arbitrarily from the protocol, including
by halting, omitting or equivocating messages. When the context
is clear, we simply write Byzantine.
Secure Aggregation. Bonawitz et al. [10] introduced secure aggregation for FL via pairwise random masks that cancel upon aggregation. The protocol assumes a synchronous network and provides
privacy against an honest-but-curious or privacy-Byzantine server,
while considering clients to be potentially privacy-Byzantine or
dropping out. To handle dropouts, the protocol employs a doublemasking mechanism: each client also secret-shares the seed of an
additional mask with all other clients, allowing the server to reconstruct the seed of any missing participant, which limits the number
of tolerated dropouts. Subsequent works show that replacing the
fully connected client graph with a logarithmic-degree k-regular
graph significantly reduces communication costs [8, 37]. These
works focus on secure aggregation but do not apply differential
privacy to safeguard the published aggregate.
FLDP [40] addresses this limitation by introducing a differentially private aggregation protocol based on Learning With Errors
(LWE)[36] reducing the complexity of Bonawitz et al. [10]. Each
client masks its gradient using an LWE-based scheme, then sends
it to the server. Clients further reconstruct the sum of their masks
and transmit it to the server, which recovers the global sum by subtracting this aggregated mask from the sum of masked gradients.
All the previous solutions assume a single server. This implies
that clients must collaborate to support mask removal and/or to
tolerate dropouts, which means that there is no client-to-client
independence. Prio [14] (and its evolution Prio+ [2]), like our
approach, addresses this problem by replicating the server. Unlike
our protocol, all servers are assumed to be honest. In a similar
vein, Elsa [35] considers two servers, allowing one server and some
clients to be Byzantine. In the case of a Byzantine server, the inputs
of honest clients are guaranteed to remain private.
Verifiable Secure Aggregation. FlexScaAgg [41] proposes a solution that includes verifiable aggregation, enabling clients to check
the integrity of the computation. For secure aggregation, the protocol uses two non-colluding entities—the server and the initiator—each generating a random seed for every client. Clients expand
these seeds into two independent masks. Neither the server nor
the initiator can recover individual updates on their own; only by
collaborating can they compute the true sum. Unlike our solution,
that tolerates only honest-but-curious clients, this mechanism can
tolerate integrity-Byzantine clients, up to 𝑛 − 2. Its main limitation,
however, is availability: if either server or initiator fails, the protocol halts. Besides [41], few schemes address verifiable aggregation,
allowing users to check the correctness of aggregation results, such

,,

Antonella Del Pozzo, Achille Desreumaux, Mathieu Gestin, Alexandre Rapetti, and Sara Tucci

Property

Bonawitz [10]

Bell [8]

FLDP [40]

FlexScaAgg [41]

This paper

×

×

✓

×

✓

Security & Privacy
Final and intermediary model privacy
Robustness & Liveness
Model-Byzantine aggregator tolerance

×

×

×

✓

✓

Aggregator omission fault tolerance

×

×

×

×

✓

×

×

×

×

✓

Client-to-client independence

×

×

×

✓

✓

One-shot clients

×

×

×

×

✓

Communication assumptions

Sync

Unspecified

Unspecified

Unspecified

Async

Fairness & Participation
Straggler management (slow vs fast clients)
Architecture & Efficiency

Communication & computation complexity
Client bits complexity

O (𝑁𝑔 + 𝑛𝑐 )

O (𝑁𝑔 + log 𝑛𝑐 )

O (𝑁𝑔 + 𝑁𝑠 + 𝑛𝑐 )

O (𝑁𝑔 𝑛𝑎 )

O (𝑁𝑔 + 𝑁𝑠 𝑛𝑎 )

Server bits complexity

O (𝑛𝑐 (𝑁𝑔 + 𝑛𝑐 ))

O (𝑛𝑐 (𝑁𝑔 + log 𝑛𝑐 ))

O (𝑁𝑔 𝑛𝑐 + 𝑁𝑠 )

O (𝑁𝑔 (𝑛𝑐 + 𝑛𝑎 ))

O (𝑁𝑔 (𝑛𝑐 + 𝑛𝑎 ) + 𝑛𝑐 (𝑁𝑠 + 𝑛𝑎 ))

Client message complexity

O (𝑛𝑐 )

O (log 𝑛𝑐 )

O (𝑛𝑐 )

O (𝑛𝑎 )

O (𝑛𝑎 )

Server message complexity

O (𝑛𝑐 )

O (𝑛𝑐 )

O (𝑛𝑐 )

O (𝑛𝑎 + 𝑛𝑐 )

O (𝑛𝑎 + 𝑛𝑐 )

Client computational complexity

O (𝑛𝑐 (𝑁𝑔 + 𝑛𝑐 ))

O (log 𝑛𝑐 (𝑁𝑔 + log 𝑛𝑐 ))

O (𝑛𝑐 log 𝑛𝑐 + 𝑁𝑔 𝑁𝑠 )

O (𝑁𝑔 𝑛𝑎 )

O (𝑁𝑠 𝑛𝑎 + 𝑁𝑔 𝑁𝑠 )

Server computational complexity

O (𝑁𝑔 𝑛𝑐2 )

O (𝑛𝑐 (log2 𝑛𝑐 + 𝑁𝑔 log 𝑛𝑐 ))

O (𝑁𝑔 (𝑛𝑐 + 𝑁𝑠 ) + 𝑛𝑐 log 𝑛𝑐 )

O (𝑁𝑔 (𝑛𝑎 + 𝑛𝑐 ))

O (𝑁𝑔 (𝑛𝑐 + 𝑛𝑎 ) + 𝑁𝑠 (𝑛𝑐 𝑛𝑎 + 𝑁𝑔 ))

Table 1: Comparison of our solution with state-of-the-art secure aggregation protocols. We denote by 𝑛𝑎 the number of
aggregators, by 𝑛𝑐 the number of clients, and by 𝑁𝑔 the size of an update. Note that 𝑛𝑎 is on the order of log(𝑛𝑐 ).

as VerifyNet [45] and VeriFL [20]. In those works, clients perform
verification themselves; in contrast, our design delegates verification to the aggregators, leaving clients with the lightweight task of
checking a quorum of aggregator signatures.
Comparison. Table 1 compares the works most closely related
to ours along four axes. (i) Both FLDP [40], and our work ensure
that no intermediate aggregate is ever revealed without DP noise
already embedded in it, a strictly stronger privacy property than SA
alone [8, 10, 41]. (ii) Our protocol tolerates both integrity-Byzantine
aggregators — as does FlexScaAgg [41] — and fully Byzantine ones,
including omission faults, a liveness guarantee absent from all
baselines. (iii) Clients neither communicate with each other (clientto-client independence) nor engage in multiple rounds (one-shot
clients), as mask removal is delegated entirely to aggregators. Furthermore, our protocol operates in an asynchronous communication model, which naturally accommodates straggler management
— preventing fast clients from disproportionate privacy exposure
— a concern unaddressed by all compared works. (iv) Under the
practical assumptions 𝑛𝑎 = O (log 𝑛𝑐 ) and 𝑁𝑠 log 𝑛𝑐 = 𝑜 (𝑁𝑔 ), our
protocol achieves state-of-the-art complexities for communication
metrics: O (𝑁𝑔 ) and O (𝑁𝑔 𝑛𝑐 ) in client and server communication
bits, O (log 𝑛𝑐 ) and O (𝑛𝑐 ) in message complexity. For computation,
our client pays O (𝑁𝑔 𝑁𝑠 ) and our server O (𝑁𝑔 𝑛𝑐 + 𝑁𝑔 𝑁𝑠 ), the inherent cost of the LWE approach, shared with FLDP. A detailed
analysis is provided in Appendix B.

4

Model and problem statement

Threat and network model. We consider a set of 𝑛𝑐 honest-butcurious clients, among which up to 𝑡𝑐 may crash. Crashed clients

stop participating indefinitely but never behave maliciously. The
remaining 𝑛𝑐 − 𝑡𝑐 clients are said to be correct. We also consider a
set of 𝑛𝑎 aggregators that collectively assume the role traditionally
played by the central server in classical federated learning schemes.
Among these, up to 𝑡𝑎 may be fully Byzantine. The remaining 𝑛𝑎 −𝑡𝑎
aggregators are considered correct, in the distributed-systems sense
that they follow the protocol as specified. However, from a security
standpoint, they are modeled as honest-but-curious (non-colluding
semi-honest) entities: they do not deviate from the protocol but
may attempt to infer information from the data they process.
The proposed solution operates in a reliable asynchronous network, meaning that there is no known upper bound on message
delays, yet messages sent by correct participants are eventually
delivered and never lost. However, clients may permanently drop
out of the computation if they crash, and faulty aggregators too. To
cope with this adversarial setting, we require that 𝑛𝑎 > 3𝑡𝑎 . This
threshold ensures protection from equivocation of Byzantine processes, thus enforcing the client’s privacy (c.f. section 6.3). We also
require that 𝑛𝑐 > 4𝑡𝑐 . This threshold, higher than the theoretical
crash based distributed computation theory, is required to ensure
that clients can be included by aggregators in an unbiased manner
(c.f. section 6.3).

Data distribution. We consider that clients hold heterogeneous
data. Such heterogeneity impacts the protocol design, as asynchronous communication with no known bound on message delays may
introduce bias in the resulting model: if “fast” clients contribute
more frequently than “slow” ones, and their data are biased, the
global model may also become biased.

Privacy-Preserving Federated Averaging with Byzantine Aggregators in Asynchronous Networks

Problem statement. We consider the following optimization problem: the clients and the aggregators must collaborate to find 𝑤˜ ∗ , an
estimation of the optimal value
𝑛𝑐
∑︁ 𝑚𝑖
∑︁
∑︁ 𝑚𝑖
𝑤 ∗ = min
𝑚𝑖 .
𝐹𝑐𝑖 (𝑤) = min
𝐹𝑐𝑖 (𝑤),
𝑀=
𝑤
𝑤
𝑀
𝑀
𝑖=1
𝑐 ∈C
𝑐 ∈ C∗
𝑖

𝑖

(1)
Where C ∗ is any subset of 𝑛𝑐 − 2𝑡𝑐 clients in C, and where 𝐹𝑐𝑖 is
a smooth and strongly convex function ∀𝑖 ∈ {1, · · · , 𝑛𝑐 }.
The goal for each correct aggregator 𝑎𝑖 is to find its own estimation
𝑤˜ 𝑖∗ of 𝑤 ∗ , where ||𝑤˜ 𝑖∗ − 𝑤 ∗ || ≤ 𝛿, for a predefined 𝛿. However, 𝑤˜ 𝑖∗
can be different from 𝑤˜ ∗𝑗 , for two different aggregators 𝑎𝑖 and 𝑎 𝑗 .
Importantly, our objective is not only to solve the above optimization problem, but to solve it under the semantics of a synchronous
federated learning scheme. More precisely, our problem is to emulate a synchronous round-based FL scheme over asynchronous
communications within the fault model described above.

5

High-Level System and Protocol Description

This section provides a high-level overview of the privacy-preserving
and fair federated averaging protocol with asynchronous communication and Byzantine aggregators.
Round 𝜏
Current clusters

1
2

𝐶1

6

Round 𝜏 −1

𝐶3

Cluster 1

Round 𝜏

𝐶8
3

4

𝐶2

Cluster 1’

𝐶4

𝐶1
𝐴2

𝐶5

𝐶6

𝐶7

Cluster 2

𝐶9

Cluster 2’

𝐶7

𝐶3
𝐴3

𝐶8

𝐶9

Cluster 3

Learning protocol in a nutshell. Our protocol proceeds in rounds.
Each round follows a two-stage aggregation structure.
Clients first compute a local model update using gradient descent
on their private data, which is then sent to the aggregators in
a privacy-preserving way. To distribute the load across multiple
aggregators, clients are organized into clusters of equal size 𝑘, with
each cluster managed by a dedicated aggregator, referred to as the
cluster coordinator.
In the first stage (intra-cluster aggregation), each cluster coordinator acts as a proxy for the clients, who remain the actual dealers
of their secrets—that is, their model updates. Clients produce shares
of their updates for all aggregators, encrypting each share with the
recipient aggregator’s key. The coordinator collects the encrypted
update shares from its cluster and, once enough valid shares have
been received, redistributes them to all aggregators. It then initiates the reconstruction phase of the cluster-level aggregate. Other
aggregators collaborate in this process by computing the partial
sums on their shares and contributing to the reconstruction of the
cluster-level aggregate.
In the second stage (inter-cluster aggregation), cluster-level aggregates are further combined by coordinators to produce the global
model, which is then distributed back to clients for the next round.
Figure 1 illustrates this structure and the main steps executed
by clients and aggregators within one round, while Figure 2 details
communications among aggregators during the 4𝑡ℎ step in Figure 1.
In the following, we further detail the main protocol mechanisms.

𝐶5
𝐴1

𝐶2

Round 𝜏 + 1
New clusters

5
Generation of
verified model
Round 𝜏

,,

𝐶4

𝐶6

Cluster 3’

Figure 1: Overview of one training round.(1) Client receives
the global model from the previous round, with a proof of
correct aggregation. (2) Client verifies the proof and compute
a local model update. (3) It produces a privacy-preserving update by adding a mask and calibrated DP noise, and sends it
to its coordinator. Aggregators collect masked updates from
their cluster and, once enough contributions are received,
include 𝜌 clients to mitigate delay bias and reduce the DP
noise budget. (4) They aggregate the included masked updates, collaboratively remove the masks on the cluster-level
sum, and perform a second inter-cluster aggregation to obtain the global model for the next round. (5) Aggregators
produce a threshold signature as a proof of correct aggregation, determine their new cluster and (6) send the global
model to the clients.

Privacy-preserving method. Client privacy is achieved through a
combination of masking and differential privacy (DP). Each client
masks its model update using a random vector 𝑠𝑖 that is secretshared among all aggregators, and adds random noise 𝑒𝑖 calibrated
to satisfy the DP guarantees. The noise provides DP protection at
the cluster-level aggregated model, whereas the masking mechanism
hides each individual model update before aggregation. To make
masking efficient, we adapt a Learning-With-Errors (LWE)–based
Verifiable Secret Sharing (VSS) scheme [40], which produces compact shares on the mask rather than on the full model update.
Unlike [40], in our protocol, the mask is collaboratively removed
by the aggregators—rather than by the clients—to avoid inter-client
communication and improve scalability. This unmasking is performed only on the cluster-level aggregated sum of client updates,
never on individual updates, ensuring that no single update is
ever exposed in clear form. Importantly, privacy is guaranteed
only when updates are aggregated in sets of at least 𝜌 clients,
where 𝜌 denotes the minimum aggregation size required to satisfy the DP guarantees. This mechanism allows each client to only
add a noise which follows the distribution law N (0, (𝜎 2 /𝜌)I), where
𝜎 2 = (𝑇 · 𝐶 2 · 𝛼)/(2 · 𝜖max ) ⇔ 𝜖max (𝛼) = (𝑇 · 𝐶 2 · 𝛼)/(2 · 𝜎 2 ), with
𝑇 the maximum number of times a client’s update is added to a
global model, 𝛼 and 𝜖max the necessary RDP parameters required to
reach the desired privacy guarantees, and 𝐶 the clipping parameter.2
Client-to-cluster assignment. In our solution, the assignment of
clients to clusters plays a crucial role. First, to preserve privacy,
clusters must form a partition of the clients into disjoint subsets.
2 The clipping step restricts the gradient’s norm to at most 𝐶 . It is used to enable the

DP analysis of privacy preserving learning schemes [1].

,,

Antonella Del Pozzo, Achille Desreumaux, Mathieu Gestin, Alexandre Rapetti, and Sara Tucci

intra-cluster-aggregation stage
1

𝑎1

2

SHARES COLLECTION
AND PREPARATION

inter-cluster-aggregation stage
3

4

INTRA-CLUSTER-RECONSTRUCTION

INTER-CLUSTER-SUM

5

6

START NEW
ROUND

𝑎2

SUM-SHARES

INTRA-CLUSTER-RECONSTRUCTION

INTER-CLUSTER-SUM

CERTIFY

𝑎3

SUM-SHARES

INTRA-CLUSTER-RECONSTRUCTION

INTER-CLUSTER-SUM

CERTIFY

Figure 2: Communication flow for aggregator 𝑎 1 . 𝑎 1 waits for enough updates, then includes 𝜌 out of 𝑘 updates (1). It sends each
share of the 𝜌 updates to the concerned aggregators which aggregate the shares and produce a proof of non-tampering (2). Each
aggregator sends back the aggregated shares and proofs to 𝑎 1 , which verifies the proof, reconstructs the mask, unmasks the
cluster-level aggregated update, and aggregates the proofs of non-tampering (3). 𝑎 1 broadcasts the proof and the aggregate to
the aggregators, who do the same thing with their own aggregates (4). Once enough intra-cluster aggregates and proofs are
received, 𝑎 1 shares them with the aggregators for them to verify and sign the sum of the intra-cluster aggregate (5). Once 𝑎 1
receives enough such signatures, it begins a new round (6).
Indeed, if two intra-cluster aggregates overlap on some clients, a
Byzantine aggregator could compute a linear combination—e.g.,
subtract one aggregate from another—to isolate a smaller subset of
updates and compromise privacy. For this reason, our assignment
mechanism enforces disjoint clusters of size 𝑘 > 𝜌, ensuring that
any linear combination of aggregates involves at least 𝜌 distinct
clients and cannot reveal information about smaller subsets.
Second, our assignment mechanism reshuffles clients between
clusters from one round to the next. A static cluster assignment
could bias the learning process: clients assigned to a Byzantine or
crashed coordinator might never contribute, and clusters with too
many failed clients (which could prevent reaching the 𝜌 threshold)
might be ignored by correct coordinators. Moreover, coordinators
are not guaranteed to compute exactly the same global model at the
end of a round. This divergence is unavoidable in an asynchronous
system with faults, where each aggregator can wait for other intracluster aggregates from only 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎 other aggregators during the
inter-cluster aggregation. In this setting, a static assignment would
therefore hinder convergence of the global model.
To address these issues, we employ a verifiable deterministic
shuffling algorithm that takes the round number as input and uses
it as a random seed in a public hash function to create a new partition of the clients (disjoint sets) at each round. This ensures that
the client-to-cluster assignment is independently verifiable by all
participants and that, in expectation, each client is assigned to a
uniformly random cluster in every round.
Client inclusion and bias mitigation. Once a coordinator has received enough updates from its assigned clients, it must include a
subset of 𝜌 < 𝑘 clients whose updates will be included in the intracluster aggregation. This inclusion process is critical to mitigate the
bias induced by non-uniform communication delays among clients.
Without such regulation, faster clients could be over-represented
in the training process, leading to biased model updates.
Our inclusion mechanism operates by letting each aggregator
include from its current cluster the 𝜌 clients it has included least
frequently in previous rounds. To maximize the likelihood of collecting the largest possible number of contributions, including those
from slower clients, a signaling mechanism is employed to estimate
the number of correct clients within each cluster. We demonstrate
experimentally that this procedure yields an approximately uniform

inclusion distribution for the 𝑛𝑐 − 2𝑡𝑐 fastest clients, even when
communication delays are not uniformly distributed.
Importantly, this inclusion mechanism also reduces the amount
of noise that clients must inject to satisfy a given DP budget. In
a setting with non-uniform delays, a fast client could be included
in every round and would therefore need to add more noise to
maintain its DP guarantees. With our inclusion mechanism, each
client only needs to calibrate its noise proportionally to 𝜌/𝑘, since
it is included, in expectation, only a fraction 𝜌/𝑘 of the rounds.
This significantly improves the utility of the aggregated model for
a given privacy level.
Aggregate verification and global model certification. Because coordinators may be Byzantine, each coordinator must produce a
proof that the global model has been computed in compliance with
the protocol and is derived from the model updates of the clients in
the clusters. These proofs enable clients to verify the global model
they receive at the beginning of each round. Certification, on the
other hand, cannot be obtained by comparing coordinators’ results,
as is classical in systems using consensus, because, as already mentioned, due to asynchrony, each coordinator may end up with a
different inter-cluster aggregate.
To address this issue, we use a PVAHSS scheme. This mechanism
enables the verification of the intra- and inter-cluster aggregates
(or sums), ensuring that each aggregate is consistent with the committed values. The verifications are performed by the aggregators
themselves at the end of each round. Each coordinator collects at
least 𝑛𝑎 −𝑡𝑎 signed verifications for its global model, which together
form the certificate associated with that model.

6

Detailed protocol description

This section incrementally presents the detailed learning protocol
for asynchronous networks with Byzantine aggregators. Due to
space constraints the complete algorithm for the protocol and its
detailed description are provided in Section C.2.

6.1

The basic privacy preserving protocol

The basis of our protocol is an adaptation of the FedAvg scheme [28]
to the replicated aggregators case. It is calibrated for the optimal
Byzantine resilience 𝑛𝑎 ≥ 3𝑡𝑎 + 1. Our protocol is described in

Privacy-Preserving Federated Averaging with Byzantine Aggregators in Asynchronous Networks
𝑤𝑖𝜏 −1

1

𝑐𝑖

,,

𝑤𝑖𝜏 −1

5
3

2

Train

DP and mask
𝑔𝑖𝜏

4

𝑠 𝜏(𝑖,3)

Encrypt

SS.Share

𝑠 𝜏(𝑖,2)

Encrypt

𝑠 𝜏(𝑖,1)

Encrypt

6

A1

𝐴3

Decrypt

𝑠 𝜏(𝑖,3)

𝐴2

Decrypt

𝑠 𝜏(𝑖,2)

A1

Decrypt

𝑠 𝜏(𝑖,1)

ℎ𝜏𝑖 = 𝑔𝑖𝜏 + 𝐴 · 𝑠𝑖𝜏 + 𝑒𝑖𝜏

Figure 3: Privacy preserving update sharing: Aggregator shares its model with a client (1). client trains the model on local
data (2), adds noise 𝑒𝑖𝜏 to the update and masks it with 𝑠𝑖𝜏 (3). Shares are produced using a (𝑛𝑎 , 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎 )-SS scheme (4). Shares are
encrypted and sent to their recipient, using 𝑎 1 as a proxy (5). Aggregators receive and decrypt their shares (6).
Algorithm 1 for the client and in Algorithm 2 for the aggregator.
The protocol is initiated through the operation Train(), invoked by
aggregators. Then, communication between clients and aggregators
relies on two message types: TRAIN messages and UPDATE messages.
TRAIN messages are used to activate clients and share the current
model of an aggregator with the clients it coordinates. The UPDATE
messages are used by each client to answer to a TRAIN message.
As outlined in Figure 3, at the beginning of the round 𝜏, client 𝑐𝑖
b𝜏
receives a global model 𝑊
Proposed from an aggregator. It performs
local steps of gradient descent algorithm using its local data, thus
obtaining a model update in the form of a gradient 𝑔𝑖𝜏 . However,
it wants this gradient to be protected from reconstruction and
membership inference attacks. To do so, 𝑐𝑖 clips its gradient 𝑔𝑖𝜏 such
that 𝑔¯𝑖𝜏 ← 𝑔𝑖𝜏 /max(1, ||𝑔𝑖𝜏 || 2 /𝐶). Then, 𝑐𝑖 hides 𝑔¯𝑖 𝜏 by computing
ℎ𝑖 = 𝑔¯𝑖𝜏 +𝐴·𝑠𝑖 +𝑒𝑖 , where 𝐴 is a public matrix, 𝑠𝑖 is the masking value,
and 𝑒𝑖 is the Gaussian noise that enables differential privacy. The
use of 𝐴 makes it possible to reduce the size of the mask 𝑠𝑖 without
decreasing security. We denote by 𝑁𝑠 the size of 𝑠𝑖 , which depends
on the security required, and we denote by 𝑁𝑔 the size of 𝑔𝑖𝜏 , where
𝑁𝑠 is smaller than 𝑁𝑔 by orders of magnitude. We refer to [40]
for the evaluation of the size of the parameters. The amplitude of
the noise 𝑒𝑖 is computed such that (𝛼, 𝜖)-RDP [30] is guaranteed
only if the noisy gradient 𝑔¯𝑖𝜏 + 𝑒𝑖 of 𝑐𝑖 is combined with enough
other updates. We denote this number by 𝜌, where 𝜌 < 𝑘. Thus,
we have 𝑒𝑖 ∼ N (0, (𝜎 2 /𝜌)I), and the sum of the 𝜌 noises follow
the distribution N (0, 𝜎 2 I), where 𝜎 2 = (𝑇 · 𝐶 2 · 𝛼)/(2 · 𝜖max) ⇔
𝜖max (𝛼) = (𝑇 · 𝐶 2 · 𝛼)/(2 · 𝜎 2 ), with 𝑇 the maximum number of
times a client’s gradient is added to a global model, and 𝛼 and
𝜖max the necessary RDP parameters required to reach the desired
privacy guarantees. This noise ensures that our protocol is (𝛼, 𝜖max )RDP [40].
Then, 𝑐𝑖 builds a set of 𝑛𝑎 shares 𝑠 (𝑖,𝑗 ) , ∀𝑎 𝑗 ∈ A of the mask 𝑠𝑖
using a (𝑛𝑎 , 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎 )−SS scheme and distributes the shares along
with the masked and noisy gradient to its coordinator 𝑎 𝑗 . This
aggregator acts as a proxy between the clients it coordinates and
the final recipients of the shares. To protect privacy, each share
is encrypted with the key of a symmetric encryption scheme of
its final recipient. The use of a proxy removes the need for aggregators to confirm that other aggregators received their shares for
specific clients’ gradients. Any other solution for such confirmation would involve expensive communication. When a coordinator
receives enough masked gradients and encrypted shares, it chooses
a set S of 𝜌 clients, and broadcasts their encrypted shares to the
other aggregators using a SUM-SHARES message. The aggregators

then decrypt and aggregate the shares. Once the aggregator 𝑎𝑘 has
Í
aggregated the share 𝑠˜𝑘 = 𝑐 𝑗 ∈ S 𝑠 ( 𝑗, 𝑘), it sends it back to the coordinator 𝑎𝑖 using an INTRA-CLUSTER-RECONSTRUCTION message.
The coordinator computes the cluster-level aggregated gradient as:
SS.Recover({𝑠˜𝑘 } ∀𝑎𝑘 ∈ A ),

b=
𝐻

∑︁

ℎ𝑗,

b=𝐻
b − 𝐴 · 𝑠b.
and 𝐺

𝑗 ∈S

Once 𝑎𝑖 has computed the cluster-level gradient, it can begin
the inter-cluster aggregation stage. During this stage, aggregators
share their cluster-level aggregated gradients with other aggregators using INTER-CLUSTER-SUM messages. Once the aggregator 𝑎𝑖
receives aggregated gradients from at least 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎 aggregators, it
averages those gradients and reconstructs the global model. The
b 𝜏+1 value in the next
aggregator uses this global model as its 𝑊
𝑖
round of training.
Unlike prior secure aggregation protocols, our protocol makes
an innovative use of SS to achieve secure aggregation. Our solution
does not require clients to participate in the reconstruction of 𝑠𝑖 ;
instead, this task is delegated to the aggregators themselves. This
design significantly reduces communication overhead with a potentially large number of clients, while SS ensures that an individual
gradient 𝑔𝑖𝜏 + 𝑒𝑖 is never reconstructed by Byzantine aggregators
without the participation of 𝑛𝑎 − 2𝑡𝑎 > 𝑡𝑎 + 1 correct aggregators.
Thus, those correct aggregators are entitled to verify that potential
Byzantine aggregators do not reconstruct 𝑔𝑖𝜏 + 𝑒𝑖 if not aggregated
with 𝜌 − 1 others.

6.2

Assignment

Our system’s privacy requires that each aggregator compute a
unique, noisy aggregate such that each individual gradient is hidden
among a set of 𝜌 − 1 other gradients.
However, if each aggregator were allowed to independently include its own set of clients, then we might end up with 𝑛𝑎 different
sets of aggregated updates that may intersect. If two of those aggregates differ by only one client’s update, it is easy to subtract those
two aggregates to find the individual value of this client, thus violating privacy. One natural idea to solve this problem is to require
aggregators to agree on a unique set of clients to activate. This step
is known as Agreement on a Common Subset (ACS), and has to be
solved using a consensus algorithm. Yet, consensus is impossible to
achieve deterministically in asynchronous systems with faults [19].
To enforce non-intersection of client sets in a fair manner and
without consensus, we deterministically partition the set of clients

,,

2
3

Antonella Del Pozzo, Achille Desreumaux, Mathieu Gestin, Alexandre Rapetti, and Sara Tucci

Function CreateMaskedModel(𝑔𝑖𝜏 ) is
𝑠 ← GenerateRandomSecret( ); 𝑒 ← DrawRandomNoise( );
||𝑔𝑐𝜏 || 2

10

𝑔¯𝑖𝜏 ← 𝑔𝑖𝜏 /max(1, 𝐶𝑖 );
ℎ ← 𝑔¯𝑖𝜏 + 𝐴 · 𝑠 + 𝑒;
SecretShares ← (𝑛𝑎 , 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎 )-SS.Share(𝑠 );
encShares ← ∅𝑛𝑎 ;
for 𝑎 ℓ ∈ A do
encShares[ℓ ] ←
PKCrypt.Encrypt( (𝑐𝑖 , SecretShares[𝑙 ], DigSig.Sign( (
𝜏, 𝑐𝑖 , SecretShares[𝑙 ] ), SKSig𝑐𝑖 ) ), SKEnc (𝑎ℓ ,𝑐𝑖 ) );

11

Return (ℎ, encShares);

4
5
6

7
8

′

c𝜏
> is received do
When TRAIN < 𝜏, 𝑊
proposed
c𝜏
14
𝑎 𝑗 ← Assigned(𝜏, 𝑐𝑖 ); 𝑔𝜏 ← ∇𝐹𝑖 (𝑊
𝑖

15

2

When SUM-SHARES⟨𝜏, S 𝑗 𝜏 , TmpShares⟩ is received from
aggregator 𝑎 𝑗 do
′
11
If not | S 𝑗 𝜏 | = 𝜌 then Return;
12
sumShares ← {0} 𝑁𝑠 ;
13
for encShare ∈ TmpShares do
14
(𝑐𝑘 , share, sig) ←
PKCrypt.Decrypt(encShare, SKEnc (𝑎𝑖 ,𝑐𝑘 ) );
15
If not DigSig.Verify( (𝜏, 𝑐𝑘 , share), PKSig𝑐𝑘 ) then
Return;
16
Stmp ← Stmp ∪ 𝑐𝑘 ; sumShares ← sumShares ⊕ share;

10

13

16

When UPDATE⟨𝜏, ℎ𝜏𝑗 , encShares𝜏𝑗 ⟩ is received from client 𝑐 𝑗 do
maskedUpdates𝜏𝑖 [ 𝑗 ] ← ℎ𝜏𝑗 ; encShares𝜏𝑖 [ 𝑗 ] ← encShares𝜏𝑗 ;
3
S𝑖𝜏 ← S𝑖𝜏 ∪ {𝑐 𝑗 };
4
If |maskedUpdates𝜏𝑖 | ≥ 𝜌 and no SUM-SHARES sent then
′
5
S𝑖 𝜏 ← Include( S𝑖𝜏 );
b𝜏 ← 𝐻
b𝜏 + maskedUpdates𝜏 [ 𝑗 ] ;
6
for 𝑐 𝑗 ∈ S𝑖𝜏 do 𝐻
𝑖
𝑖
𝑖
7
for 𝑎𝑘 ∈ A do
8
TmpShares ← encShares𝜏𝑖 [ℓ ] [𝑘 ], ∀ℓ ∈ S𝑖𝜏 ;
′
9
Send SUM-SHARES⟨𝜏 + 𝐸, S𝑖 𝜏 , TmpShares⟩ to 𝑎𝑘 ;

1

proposed

, 𝜉𝑖𝜏 );

(ℎ, 𝜎ℎ , encShares) ← CreateMaskedModel(𝑔𝑖𝜏 );
Send UPDATE⟨𝜏, ℎ, 𝜎ℎ , encShares⟩ to aggregator 𝑎 𝑗 ;

Algorithm 1: Privacy preserving training scheme (for 𝑐𝑖 ).

at each aggregation step using a public, predefined shuffling function. This partition function Assign takes as input the round number
and outputs a deterministic partition of the set of clients, assigning
each client to a unique aggregator. An aggregator 𝑎𝑖 is thus assigned
the cluster S𝑖𝜏 ⊂ C at round 𝜏, where |S𝑖𝜏 | = 𝑘 = 𝑛𝑐 /𝑛𝑎 . 3
The assignment algorithm, albeit deterministic, assigns clients to
aggregators uniformly at random in expectation. In other words, in
expectation, each client will be assigned to each aggregator during
the execution of the protocol. Furthermore, if a client is assigned to
aggregators with the same set of clients over the rounds and if this
set of clients contains too many (𝑘 − 𝜌 − 1) crashed clients, then
the correct clients may never participate, thus biasing the resulting
model. To avoid this problem, we force the assignment algorithm
to shuffle the clients in the sets S𝑖 .
Formally, the assignment algorithm can be defined as follows:
Definition 1. Assignment algorithm. Let Assign : N → C𝑘 ×𝑛𝑎
be a deterministic function that takes as input a round number 𝜏 and
outputs {S1𝜏 , · · · , S𝑛𝜏 𝑎 } a partition of C of size 𝑛𝑎 , where |S𝑖𝜏 | = 𝑘,
∀𝑖 ∈ {1, · · · , 𝑛𝑎 }, ∀𝜏 ∈ N and with 𝑘 = 𝑛𝑐 /𝑛𝑎 . Furthermore, we
define a function Assigned : N × C → A that takes as input the
round 𝜏 and the identity of a client, and outputs 𝑎𝑖 , the identity of
the client’s coordinator at step 𝜏. The Assign function fulfills the two
following properties:
• Random aggregator assignment. ∀S ∗ ∈ Assign(𝜏)
= {S1𝜏 , · · · , S𝑛𝜏 𝑎 }, ∀𝑐𝑖 ∈ C, 𝑃𝑟 [𝑐𝑖 ∈ S ∗ ] = 1/𝑛𝑎 .
• Random set of clients. ∀𝑐𝑖 , 𝑐 𝑗 ∈ C, 𝑐 𝑗 ≠ 𝑐𝑖 and ∀𝜏 ∈ N,
if Assigned(𝜏, 𝑐𝑖 ) = 𝑎𝑘 then 𝑃𝑟 [Assigned(𝜏, 𝑐 𝑗 ) = 𝑎𝑘 ] =
(𝑘 − 1)/(𝑛𝑐 − 1).
Such an assignment algorithm can be easily instantiated using
a hash function whose input is the round and produces an output
of size 𝑛𝑐 × 𝑛𝑎 bits. One such implementation is the Ethereum
swap-or-not shuffling algorithm [23].
3 To ease the rest of the discussions and without loss of generality, we assume that
𝑛𝑎 | 𝑛𝑐 . This condition can be relaxed in a real-world implementation, such that all
clusters have the same size ⌊𝑛𝑐 /𝑛𝑎 ⌋ except one cluster, which is larger.

17

Send INTRA-CLUSTER-RECONSTRUCTION⟨𝜏, sumShares⟩ to 𝑎 𝑗

When INTRA-CLUSTER-RECONSTRUCTION⟨𝜏, sumShares⟩ is
received from aggregator 𝑎 𝑗 do
19
SumShareSet𝜏𝑖 ← SumShareSet𝜏𝑖 ∪ {SumShares};
20
If |SumShareSet𝜏𝑖 | ≥ 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎 and no INTER-CLUSTER-SUM
sent then
b𝜏 − 𝐴 · (𝑛𝑎 , 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎 )-SS.Recover(SumShareSet);
21
𝑔b𝑖𝜏 ← 𝐻
𝑖
22
Broadcast INTER-CLUSTER-SUM⟨𝜏, 𝑔b𝑖𝜏 ⟩ to processes in A;

18

When INTER-CLUSTER-SUM⟨𝜏, 𝑔b𝜏𝑗 ⟩ is received do
Wait until INTER-CLUSTER-SUM⟨𝜏 − 1, ★⟩ is received from 𝑎 𝑗
then
25
finalSelec𝜏𝑖 ← finalSelec𝜏𝑖 ∪ {b
𝑔𝜏𝑗 };
26
If |finalSelec𝜏𝑖 | ≥ 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎 and no TRAIN⟨𝜏, ★⟩ sent
then
Í |finalSelec|
1
b𝜏 ←
finalSelec𝜏𝑖 [𝑘 ];
27
𝐺
𝑖
𝜌 ·|finalSelec| 𝑘=1
𝜏
+1
𝜏
𝜏
𝜏
c
c −𝛾 𝐺
b𝑎 ;
28
𝑊
=𝑊
𝑖
𝑖
𝑖
c𝜏 +1 ⟩ to all clients in C.
29
Broadcast TRAIN⟨𝜏 + 1, 𝑊

23

24

Algorithm 2: Privacy preserving training scheme (for 𝑎𝑖 ).

Byzantine equivocation. The assignment algorithm solves the
intersection problem for correct aggregators. However, if an aggregator 𝑎𝑖 is Byzantine, it may deviate from its algorithm and
′
equivocate, i.e., it can choose two different sets S𝑖 𝜏 ⊆ Assign(𝜏) [𝑖]
′′ 𝜏
and S𝑖 ⊆ Assign(𝜏) [𝑖] of size 𝜌 that differ in exactly one client. If
𝑎𝑖 manages to lure correct aggregators into aggregating and reconstructing the values associated with both subsets, it could learn the
exact gradient of an individual client.
To avoid this equivocation, we carefully craft the SS scheme used
to reconstruct the sum of the masks 𝑠 𝑗 such that Byzantine aggregators cannot reconstruct two different sums of masks. In practice,
we require that 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎 shares must be gathered to reconstruct a
mask. Therefore, reconstructing two different sums of masks for a
unique cluster would require getting two non-intersecting quorums

Privacy-Preserving Federated Averaging with Byzantine Aggregators in Asynchronous Networks

of 𝑛𝑎 − 2𝑡𝑎 correct processes to reconstruct different intra-cluster
aggregates for this cluster, which is not possible since 𝑛𝑎 > 3𝑡𝑎 .

6.3

Inclusion

After the assignment, aggregators have to choose a subset of 𝜌 < 𝑘
clients’ gradients in their cluster. However, if this inclusion, and
thus the data included in the training, is biased, then the final model
will be biased too. Such bias is introduced when aggregators include fast clients first due to asynchronous communications and
heterogeneous data. To solve this problem, we introduce a “debiasing” client inclusion mechanism. This mechanism works by letting
an aggregator 𝑎𝑖 wait for more client participations than required,
and then aggregate gradients of the clients less considered in the
previous rounds by 𝑎𝑖 .
The inclusion algorithm works best if aggregators wait for the
maximum possible number of client participations in their assigned
cluster each round. However, our failure assumption depends on
the global set of clients, not on each cluster. Thus, to know how
many clients an aggregator can wait for, we require that clients
send an additional message to all aggregators after finalizing the
sending of the masked gradient and shares to their coordinator.
This PING message contains a signature of the round number from
the client. It allows aggregators to determine when they waited
for the maximum number of clients they can expect, i.e., at least
𝑛𝑐 − 𝑡𝑐 clients from all clusters participated overall. However, this
mechanism could lead to interlocked aggregators, i.e., each aggregator sees the participation of clients from other clusters, and no
aggregator received enough participations from their own clusters. To solve this problem, we add a broadcast communication
phase meant to ensure that aggregators have a shared knowledge
of clients that participated. This communication phase works by
letting aggregators broadcast the identity of the 𝑛𝑐 − 𝑡𝑐 clients that
sent them PING messages, along with the signature contained in
those messages for tamper-resistance. Thanks to the properties of
intersecting quorums, a 𝑛𝑐 −𝑡𝑐 common core of participating clients
is guaranteed as 𝑛𝑎 > 3𝑡𝑎 [27]. Due to the reliable communication
model, if a message is sent, it is not dropped. Furthermore, PING
messages are sent after sending the masked gradients. Thus, if an
aggregator knows that a client sent a PING message, but did not
receive its gradient yet, it knows it will eventually receive it.
We prove experimentally that, if this mechanism is well crafted,
then the frequency at which clients are included is uniform.√More
precisely, if 𝑡𝑐 > 𝑘/2, 𝑛𝑐 > 4𝑡𝑐 + 1, 𝑘 > 2𝜌 and 𝜌 > 1 + 1 + 𝑘,
then we show that, in expectation, the 𝑛𝑐 − 2𝑡𝑐 fastest clients are
uniformly included by each correct aggregator in expectation.
Impact of inclusion on budget. Interestingly, this inclusion algorithm also decreases the required amplitude of the noise clients add
to their gradient. Indeed, we recall that the noise 𝑒𝑖 follows a distribution 𝑒𝑖 ∼ N (0, (𝜎 2 /𝜌)I), with 𝜎 2 = (𝑇 · 𝐶 2 · 𝛼)/(2 · 𝜖max ), where
𝑇 is the maximum number of times a client’s update is included.
In our case, this value is min(𝑛𝑎 ((𝜏max · 𝜌)/(𝑛𝑐 − 𝑡𝑐 ) + Δmax ),𝜏max ),
where 𝜏max is the maximum number of training rounds and Δmax
is a parameter generally set to 1 described in Section C.1. In other
Gaussian noise based FL protocols, asynchronous settings imply
that 𝑇 = 𝜏max in the worst case.

,,

Edge cases. The inclusion mechanism can induce two specific
edge cases. First, a Byzantine aggregator could decide to bias its
clients selection by not using the inclusion algorithm. We propose
to use an inclusion fraud detection mechanism to alleviate any
such Byzantine misbehaviour. Second, some correct aggregators
may not be able to include 𝜌 clients in a round if too many clients
in their cluster crash. To solve this issue, this aggregator uses the
intra-cluster model of the other aggregators this round. In following rounds, this aggregator will be able to resume to the classical
aggregation mechanism, thanks to the shuffling of the assignation
mechanism. Due to space limitations, both edge-cases are detailed
in Section C.1.

6.4

Certification

There exists a Byzantine behavior that may undermine convergence of the training. Byzantine aggregators may behave correctly
during the aggregation, but at the beginning of a new round, they
could provide the clients with global models that they arbitrarily
choose, rather than the result of the intra-cluster and inter-cluster
aggregations. Those values are used as the basis of clients’ gradient
descent algorithm, thus this attack can undermine convergence
for all correct aggregators. To overcome this attack, our protocol
certifies global models that are sent to clients. This certification
comes in the form of a proof of correct aggregation certifying that
at least one correct aggregator verified that each global model sent
to clients was produced according to the protocol.
This certification mechanism requires two building blocks: threshold signatures and Publicly Verifiable Additionally Homomorphic
Secret Sharing (PVAHSS). Threshold signatures [39] are signatures schemes with two additional operations ThreSig.Combine
and ThreSig.VerifyCombined. A threshold signature scheme is defined for a set of signatories 𝑆𝜎 and a threshold 𝑥. ThreSig.Combine
allows an actor to combine a set of 𝑥 signatures signed by 𝑥 different signatories in 𝑆𝜎 and combine them in a unique cryptographic
element which proves that 𝑥 signatories out of |𝑆𝜎 | endorsed a
common message. The ThreSig.VerifyCombined algorithm is used
to verify this combined signature.
Certification proceeds as follows. When a client is activated,
it creates shares of its mask along with two proofs PVAHSSProof
and PVAHSSPartialProof. The first proof is a commitment to the
noisy gradient, while the PVAHSSPartialProof is a set of commitment to each share produced by the client. PVAHSSProof is embedded in the encryption of the shares such that each aggregator
can receive them untampered. PVAHSSPartialProofs are sent to
coordinators. Once an aggregator received 𝜌 encrypted shares for
a given cluster through a SUM-SHARES message, it decrypts them,
sums them, and then threshold-signs the homomorphic sum of
the PVAHSSProofs before sending everything back to the coordinator. When the coordinator has received 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎 sums of shares,
it verifies each PVAHSSPartialProof to detect any outlier. Then,
it reconstructs the shares to obtain the sum of the masks and it
combines the signatures of the PVAHSSProofs. Thanks to the trust
assumption, the combined signatures of the PVAHSSProofs proves
that 𝑛𝑎 − 2𝑡𝑎 correct aggregators participated in the reconstruction.
Therefore, the combined signature can be used as a proof that the

,,

Antonella Del Pozzo, Achille Desreumaux, Mathieu Gestin, Alexandre Rapetti, and Sara Tucci

sum of the commitments was built according to the protocol, and
that no equivocation occurred.
Once this proof is constructed, aggregators have to go through
the inter-cluster aggregation phase. This phase has to be modified
to provide certification. As earlier, aggregators share their clusterlevel aggregated gradients. However, they broadcast the aggregated
gradients along with the proof of legitimate reconstruction created
during the intra-cluster aggregation phase (i.e., the threshold signature on the sum of the PVAHSSProof). When an aggregator receives
enough intra-cluster aggregated gradients and proofs, it broadcasts
them for certification. Each aggregator will verify the proofs of
correct reconstruction. If this verification passes, the aggregators
aggregate the intra-cluster gradients, threshold-signs the result,
and send back this signature to the aggregator that requested this
certification. This aggregator can combine the threshold signatures
once it received 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎 of them. This final threshold signature
proves that, at each point in the intra-cluster aggregation phase
and in the inter-cluster aggregation phase, at least one correct aggregator participated, and certified that the global model was built
using clients’ gradients. Thus, it can be used by clients as a proof
that no Byzantine aggregator tampered the model they received.

7

Evaluation

This section evaluates our solution in federated learning scenarios.
More precisely, we aim to answer the following questions:
• How does the computational overhead induced by the cryptographic mechanisms impact actors of the protocol ?
• How does our inclusion mechanism performs in highly adversarial networks and data distributions ?
• How the parameters of the protocol affect convergence of
the models when differential privacy is applied ?
We use FLDP [40] as our baseline as it is the state of the art in
terms of DP-based FL. Indeed, FLDP allows to add noise with an
amplitude inversely proportional to the number of included client’s
updates. Therefore, they are equivalent to a central DP learning
algorithm in the homogeneous communications delays model. Any
other homogeneous delays-based baseline would exhibit equivalent
or worst utility. Additionally, FLDP is state-of-the-art in term of
computationally efficient privacy preserving federated training.

7.1

Cryptographic mechanisms evaluation

In this section we isolate the cryptographic mechanisms of our
protocol to evaluate their computational overhead.
7.1.1 Experimental setup. In this section, we use simulated gradients produced as random vectors of a parameterizable size with 4
point decimal precision. We implemented FLDP and our cryptographic protocol in python, using 128 bit security cryptographic
building blocks. For encryption, we used AES128 [7]. For commitments, we used discrete log-based commitments in elliptic curve
cryptography groups on the curve P256 [6, 29]. For threshold signatures, we used the thresholdified version of the BLS signature
scheme [3, 11]. We used a modulus of 100003 for the LWE scheme
and 1002523 for the SS scheme. To achieve 128 bit security using
the LWE scheme, we used a LWE parameter estimator [4] which,
given 𝜎, the standard deviation of the noise and the modulus of the

model
avg. # data held by clients avg. training time (s)
MNIST
20
0.086
MNIST
30
0.119
CIFAR-5m
500
0.462
1000
0.922
CIFAR-5m
CIFAR-5m
2000
1.690
Table 2: Average client’s training time with our protocol
(without cryptographic mechanisms) as a function of the
average amount of data held by clients.

scheme, evaluates 𝑁𝑠 , the size of the 𝑠 vector of the LWE scheme.
This parameter being the most important in term of computation
as it governs the number of element secretly shared, as well as
the number of committed elements. In our experiments, 𝑁𝑠 varies
between 410 and 710. Except when those parameters are tested with
multiple values, the experiments have been run with 𝑛𝑐 = 1000,
𝑡𝑐 = 249, 𝜌 = 32, 𝑁𝑔 = 25000, and 𝜖 = 5.
7.1.2 Evaluation. Figure 4 shows the impact of the evolution of the
parameters 𝜌, 𝑁𝑔 and 𝑛𝑐 on the computational overhead. We can
see that, in our protocol, clients are only impacted by the 𝑁𝑔 parameter, whereas aggregators are mostly impacted by the 𝜌 parameter.
Importantly, in those experiment, we see that the cryptographic
overhead of our protocol is an order of magnitude lower than training computational overhead when the amount of data held by
clients increases (Table 2). Furthermore, we see that state-of-the-art
FLDP is highly impacted by the 𝑛𝑐 parameter, which undermines its
scalability. On the other hand, our one-shot-client approach is not
impacted by the number of clients, thus making it a good candidate
for large scale deployments.

7.2

Accuracy of training in adversarial scenarios

In this section, we evaluate two complementary aspects of our protocol: (i) the inclusion mechanism’s ability to counteract selection
bias under asynchronous network, and (ii) the privacy-accuracy
trade-off enabled by our DP scheme. Byzantine scenarios and additional experimental analyzes are deferred to Section D.
7.2.1 Experimental setup. We implement our experiments in two
phases. We use the Multi-Agent eXperimenter (MAX) [21] framework to generate per-agent communication traces, where message delays follow probabilistic distributions. Unless stated otherwise, we use three Gamma distributions modeling 𝑛𝑎 aggregators,
𝑛𝑐 − 2𝑡𝑐 − 1 fast clients, and 2𝑡𝑐 + 1 slow clients. Gamma distributions can model network delays and fit closely to real data [44]. The
traces are then consumed by Python scripts that perform model
training and aggregation according to the protocol described in this
paper.
The protocol is evaluated on the MNIST datasets comprising
70,000 28 × 28 grayscale image partitioned into 10 classes and on
the CIFAR-5m dataset [32], a CIFAR-10 like task comprising of 6
million 32 × 32 RGB images partitionned into 10 classes. Models
used are presented in detail in Section D. To summarise, we used
a 26,000 parameters model for the MNIST dataset and a 550,000
parameters model for the CIFAR-5m dataset.

Privacy-Preserving Federated Averaging with Byzantine Aggregators in Asynchronous Networks

,,

Figure 4: Computational overhead of the cryptographic scheme as a function of 𝑛𝑐 (left), 𝑁𝑔 (middle), and 𝜌 (right).
In order to take into account the heterogeneous nature of FL, we
use the popular Dirichlet method [24] to generate heterogeneity of
data distribution between clients. Data heterogeneity is simulated
by splitting the data samples of each class between the clients with
Dirichlet distributions with parameter 𝛼𝑑𝑖𝑟 = 0.5 to attain a high
heterogeneity setting while ensuring with high probability that all
clients have at least one data sample.
Finally, when applying DP, we target an (𝜖, 𝛿)-DP guarantee
with 𝛿 = 10−5 . We convert to (𝛼, 𝜖RDP )-RDP by minimizing 𝛼, then
calibrate 𝜎 to achieve the worst-case (𝜖, 𝛿)-DP guarantee over all
possible client selection sequences.

Scenario 2 — Data-induced delay. Half the clients are fast because
they hold few data samples (10% of the total), while the other half
are slow because they hold many (90%), incurring longer training
and transmission times per round. This models settings where data
volume is the bottleneck — e.g., cross-silo FL between organizations
of vastly different database sizes but similar hardware.
The inclusion mechanism reduces convergence time to 95% accuracy from 158 to 24 rounds on MNIST (6.6×), and improves final
accuracy by 9.2 pp on CIFAR-5m (73.4% vs. 82.6%). The effect is
more pronounced on CIFAR-5m because the harder task amplifies
the impact of excluding heavy-data clients.

7.2.2 Inclusion mechanism evaluation in highly adversarial networks
and data distribution. In Figure 5, we evaluate the inclusion mechanism across three scenarios that differ in the correlation between
client delays and data distribution. For each, we compare three
configurations: (i) our protocol with inclusion under heterogeneous
delays — 2 Gamma distributions for fast and slow clients, (ii) without inclusion under highly heterogeneous delays — fast clients
are systematically over-represented, and (iii) without inclusion but
with homogeneous delays — all clients draw from the same Gamma
distribution, so no group is structurally favored; this serves as an
upper-bound reference for what inclusion can recover. All experiments use 𝑛𝑐 = 1500 clients and a single aggregator (𝑡𝑎 = 0, 𝜌 = 128),
without DP.

Scenario 3 — Device-induced delay. Half the clients are fast, resource rich servers holding 90% of the data, while the other half
are slow, low-end devices holding only 10%. Here the delay is a
property of the device, not of the data volume: slow clients happen
to have little data, not the other way around. This models settings
such as FL between enterprise servers and consumer IoT devices.
In this scenario, the no-inclusion asynchronous configuration
converges slightly faster than our protocol, while our protocol
matches the homogeneous reference. This is the expected outcome:
slow clients hold only 10% of the data, so the aggregator already
captures a representative sample by favoring fast clients.
Figure 5 shows these results on both MNIST and CIFAR-5m. The
two datasets exhibit consistent qualitative behavior, confirming the
generality of the mechanism beyond the specific task.

Scenario 1 — Correlated data and delay (geo-distributed). The
first half of clients is fast and holds only classes {0, . . . , 4}; the
second half is slow and holds only classes {5, . . . , 9}. This models
settings where geographic position determines both the data type
and network latency of a client (e.g., regional sensor networks or
cross-silo FL across distant data centers).
Without the inclusion mechanism, the aggregator converges to
≈ 50% accuracy on MNIST and ≈ 45% on CIFAR-5m — learning
only half the label space. With inclusion, the aggregator reaches
98.0% on MNIST and ≈ 72% on CIFAR-5m, closely matching the
unbiased reference. On CIFAR-5m, both the inclusion and unbiasedreference configurations exhibit significant accuracy oscillations
(std ≈ 10%), which are much less pronounced on MNIST (std <
1%). The oscillations are slightly more marked with inclusion (max
drop 11.7 pp vs. 9.5 pp). This oscillation does not appear in the noinclusion asynchronous configuration, which avoids it by ignoring
slow clients entirely — at the cost of learning half the label space.

7.2.3 Differential privacy and accuracy trade-off evaluation. Figure 6 displays the mean accuracy over the last 25 rounds of training
while varying the parameters 𝜖, 𝜌, or 𝑛𝑐 . Across all experiments,
the baseline consistently underperforms our protocol under tight
DP budgets. Larger 𝜌 consistently improves accuracy, and higher
fault tolerance 𝑡𝑎 trades accuracy for Byzantine resilience due to
the additional noise it requires. These experiments illustrate that
thanks to our inclusion mechanism, we are able to introduce less
noise for the same differential privacy guarantees, resulting in a
faster convergence than our baseline in all cases.

8

Conclusion

In this paper, we introduce the first privacy-preserving and fair
federated learning protocol for asynchronous networks with fully
Byzantine aggregators. Our protocol replicates the aggregator server
and clusters clients around a coordinator server, with the clustering

,,

Antonella Del Pozzo, Achille Desreumaux, Mathieu Gestin, Alexandre Rapetti, and Sara Tucci

Figure 5: Accuracy of MNIST and CIFAR-5m under three heterogeneity scenarios. Each subfigure compares our protocol with
the inclusion mechanism, without inclusion in an asynchronous network, and without inclusion with homogeneous delays.

Figure 6: Mean accuracy over the last 25 rounds for MNIST (top) and CIFAR-5m (bottom) as a function of 𝜖 (left), 𝜌 (center), and
𝑛𝑐 (right), for our protocol with 𝑡𝑎 ∈ {0, 1, 2} vs. the baseline [40] (no inclusion). Error bars show std dev across repetitions; for
𝑡𝑎 > 0, aggregator scores are averaged per run before computing the mean and std over repetitions. Results averaged over 4
repetitions (MNIST) and 2 repetitions (CIFAR-5m).
reshuffled at each round to cope with potential Byzantine aggregators. Reshuffling also aids convergence by mixing client updates
across aggregators in the absence of per-round consensus. The
protocol adapts lightweight secure masking techniques and differential privacy, while guaranteeing one-shot client communication
and no client interdependency. It also employs verification mechanisms to certify the correctness of the aggregated model. Moreover,
to operate in asynchronous networks, we devise a fair inclusion
mechanism. This mechanism mitigates bias induced by network
asynchrony and reduces the amount of noise added to the model.
Experimental results on MNIST and CIFAR-5m datasets validate
our protocol, showing its ability to converge even when the data is
strongly partitioned across clients. We also show that our inclusion
mechanism reduces the noise added by clients to their updates, thus
increasing the utility of each individual contribution, whereas FLDP

[40] under the same conditions fails to converge. Interestingly, our
experiments also reveal that the additional cryptographic mechanisms used do not increase computationnal time compared to other
approaches, as we leverage aggregator replication to reduce the
overall amount of computation.

Privacy-Preserving Federated Averaging with Byzantine Aggregators in Asynchronous Networks

References
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]
[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H. Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov,
Kunal Talwar, and Li Zhang. 2016. Deep learning with differential privacy. In
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS ’16). Association for Computing Machinery, Vienna,
Austria, 308–318. isbn: 9781450341394. doi:10.1145/2976749.2978318.
Surya Addanki, Kevin Garbe, Eli Jaffe, Rafail Ostrovsky, and Antigoni Polychroniadou. 2022. Prio+: privacy preserving aggregate statistics via boolean
shares. In Security and Cryptography for Networks. Clemente Galdi and Stanislaw Jarecki, (Eds.) Springer International Publishing, Cham, 516–539. isbn:
978-3-031-14791-3.
Sonnino Alberto. 2020. Bls signatures. https://github.com/asonnino/bls. (2020).
Martin R. Albrecht, Rachel Player, and Sam Scott. 2015. On the concrete hardness of learning with errors. Journal of Mathematical Cryptology, 9, 3, 169–203.
doi:10.1515/jmc-2015-0016.
Anonymous. 2026. Privacy-preserving federated averaging with byzantine
aggregators in asynchronous networks implementations. https://anonymous.4
open.science/r/privacy-preserving-federated-averaging-with-byzantine-agg
regators-in-asynchronous-networks-4E25/. (2026).
AntonKueltz. 2025. Fastecdsa. https://github.com/AntonKueltz/fastecdsa/.
(2025).
Simon Arneaud et al. 2026. Pycryptodome. https://github.com/Legrandin/pycr
yptodome. (2026).
James Henry Bell, Kallista A. Bonawitz, Adrià Gascón, Tancrède Lepoint, and
Mariana Raykova. 2020. Secure single-server aggregation with (poly)logarithmic
overhead. In Proceedings of the 2020 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security (CCS ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, Virtual Event, USA, 1253–1269. isbn: 9781450370899. doi:10.1145/3372297.3417885.
Michael Ben-Or, Ran Canetti, and Oded Goldreich. 1993. Asynchronous secure
computation. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual ACM Symposium on
Theory of Computing (STOC ’93). Association for Computing Machinery, San
Diego, California, USA, 52–61. isbn: 0897915917. doi:10.1145/167088.167109.
Keith Bonawitz, Vladimir Ivanov, Ben Kreuter, Antonio Marcedone, H. Brendan McMahan, Sarvar Patel, Daniel Ramage, Aaron Segal, and Karn Seth. 2017.
Practical secure aggregation for privacy-preserving machine learning. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security (CCS ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, Dallas, Texas, USA,
1175–1191. isbn: 9781450349468. doi:10.1145/3133956.3133982.
Dan Boneh, Ben Lynn, and Hovav Shacham. 2001. Short signatures from the
weil pairing. In Advances in Cryptology — ASIACRYPT 2001. Colin Boyd, (Ed.)
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 514–532. isbn: 978-3-540-456827.
Miguel Castro and Barbara Liskov. 1999. Practical byzantine fault tolerance.
In Proceedings of the Third Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI ’99). USENIX Association, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA,
173–186. isbn: 1880446391.
Arka Rai Choudhuri, Aarushi Goel, Aditya Hegde, and Abhishek Jain. 2025.
Homomorphic secret sharing with verifiable evaluation. In Theory of Cryptography. Elette Boyle and Mohammad Mahmoody, (Eds.) Springer Nature
Switzerland, Cham, 614–650. isbn: 978-3-031-78023-3.
Henry Corrigan-Gibbs and Dan Boneh. 2017. Prio: private, robust, and scalable
computation of aggregate statistics. In Proceedings of the 14th USENIX Conference on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI’17). USENIX
Association, Boston, MA, USA, 259–282. isbn: 9781931971379.
Leo de Castro and Anitgoni Polychroniadou. 2022. Lightweight, maliciously secure verifiable function secret sharing. In Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT
2022. Orr Dunkelman and Stefan Dziembowski, (Eds.) Springer International
Publishing, Cham, 150–179. isbn: 978-3-031-06944-4.
Nathan Dowlin, Ran Gilad-Bachrach, Kim Laine, Kristin Lauter, Michael Naehrig,
and John Wernsing. 2016. Cryptonets: applying neural networks to encrypted
data with high throughput and accuracy. In Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on International Conference on Machine Learning - Volume 48
(ICML’16). JMLR.org, New York, NY, USA, 201–210.
Sisi Duan, Michael K. Reiter, and Haibin Zhang. 2018. Beat: asynchronous bft
made practical. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer
and Communications Security (CCS ’18). Association for Computing Machinery,
Toronto, Canada, 2028–2041. isbn: 9781450356930. doi:10.1145/3243734.324381
2.
Cynthia Dwork. 2006. Differential privacy. In Automata, Languages and Programming. Michele Bugliesi, Bart Preneel, Vladimiro Sassone, and Ingo Wegener, (Eds.) Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1–12. isbn: 978-3540-35908-1.
Michael J. Fischer, Nancy A. Lynch, and Michael S. Paterson. 1985. Impossibility
of distributed consensus with one faulty process. J. ACM, 32, 2, (Apr. 1985),
374–382. doi:10.1145/3149.214121.
Xiaojie Guo, Zheli Liu, Jin Li, Jiqiang Gao, Boyu Hou, Changyu Dong, and Thar
Baker. 2021. Verifl: communication-efficient and fast verifiable aggregation for

[21]
[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]
[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]
[39]

[40]

[41]

,,

federated learning. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 16,
1736–1751. doi:10.1109/TIFS.2020.3043139.
Önder Gürcan. 2024. Multi-agent experimenter (max). (2024). https://arxiv.org
/abs/2404.08398 arXiv: 2404.08398 [cs.MA].
Yan He and Liang Zhang. 2020. Cheater-identifiable homomorphic secret sharing for outsourcing computations. Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing, 11, (Nov. 2020). doi:10.1007/s12652-020-01814-5.
Viet Tung Hoang, Ben Morris, and Phillip Rogaway. 2012. An enciphering
scheme based on a card shuffle. In Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO 2012.
Reihaneh Safavi-Naini and Ran Canetti, (Eds.) Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 1–13. isbn: 978-3-642-32009-5.
Daniel M. Jimenez G., David Solans, Mikko Heikkila, Andrea Vitaletti, Nicolas
Kourtellis, Aris Anagnostopoulos, and Ioannis Chatzigiannakis. 2024. Noniid data in federated learning: a survey with taxonomy, metrics, methods,
frameworks and future directions. (2024). https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.12377
arXiv: 2411.12377 [cs.LG].
Aniket Kate, Gregory M. Zaverucha, and Ian Goldberg. 2010. Constant-size
commitments to polynomials and their applications. In Advances in Cryptology
- ASIACRYPT 2010. Masayuki Abe, (Ed.) Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 177–194. isbn: 978-3-642-17373-8.
Shenghui Li, Edith C.-H. Ngai, and Thiemo Voigt. 2024. An experimental study
of byzantine-robust aggregation schemes in federated learning. IEEE Transactions on Big Data, 10, 6, 975–988. doi:10.1109/TBDATA.2023.3237397.
Dahlia Malkhi and Michael Reiter. 1997. Byzantine quorum systems. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing
(STOC ’97). Association for Computing Machinery, El Paso, Texas, USA, 569–
578. isbn: 0897918886. doi:10.1145/258533.258650.
Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise
Aguera y Arcas. 2017. Communication-efficient learning of deep networks
from decentralized data. In Artificial intelligence and statistics. Pmlr, 1273–1282.
Adalier Mehmet and Teknik Antara. 2015. Efficient and secure elliptic curve
cryptography implementation of curve p-256. In Workshop on elliptic curve
cryptography standards.
Ilya Mironov. 2017. Rényi Differential Privacy. In 2017 IEEE 30th Computer
Security Foundations Symposium (CSF). IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos,
CA, USA, 263–275. doi:10.1109/CSF.2017.11.
Samaneh Mohammadi, Iraklis Symeonidis, Ali Balador, and Francesco Flammini. 2025. Empirical analysis of asynchronous federated learning on heterogeneous devices: efficiency, fairness, and privacy trade-offs. CoRR, abs/2505.07041.
Accepted at IJCNN 2025.
Preetum Nakkiran. 2020. Cifar-5m. https : / / github . com / preetum / cifar5m.
(2020).
Torben Pryds Pedersen. 1992. Non-interactive and information-theoretic secure verifiable secret sharing. In Advances in Cryptology — CRYPTO ’91. Joan
Feigenbaum, (Ed.) Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 129–140.
isbn: 978-3-540-46766-3.
Tao Qi, Huili Wang, and Yongfeng Huang. 2024. Towards the robustness of differentially private federated learning. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Eighth AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Thirty-Sixth Conference on Innovative
Applications of Artificial Intelligence and Fourteenth Symposium on Educational
Advances in Artificial Intelligence (AAAI’24/IAAI’24/EAAI’24). AAAI Press.
doi:10.1609/aaai.v38i18.29967.
Mayank Rathee, Conghao Shen, Sameer Wagh, and Raluca Ada Popa. 2023.
Elsa: secure aggregation for federated learning with malicious actors. In 2023
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, 1961–1979.
Oded Regev. 2009. On lattices, learning with errors, random linear codes, and
cryptography. J. ACM, 56, 6, Article 34, (Sept. 2009), 40 pages. doi:10.1145/1568
318.1568324.
César Sabater, Aurélien Bellet, and Jan Ramon. 2022. An accurate, scalable
and verifiable protocol for federated differentially private averaging. Machine
Learning, 111, 11, (Nov. 2022), 4249–4293. doi:10.1007/s10994-022-06267-9.
Claus-Peter Schnorr. 1991. Efficient signature generation by smart cards. J.
Cryptol., 4, 3, 161–174. doi:10.1007/BF00196725.
Victor Shoup. 2000. Practical threshold signatures. In Proceedings of the 19th
International Conference on Theory and Application of Cryptographic Techniques (EUROCRYPT’00). Springer-Verlag, Bruges, Belgium, 207–220. isbn:
3540675175.
Timothy Stevens, Christian Skalka, Christelle Vincent, John Ring, Samuel
Clark, and Joseph Near. 2022. Efficient differentially private secure aggregation
for federated learning via hardness of learning with errors. In 31st USENIX
Security Symposium (USENIX Security 22). USENIX Association, Boston, MA,
(Aug. 2022), 1379–1395. isbn: 978-1-939133-31-1. https://www.usenix.org/conf
erence/usenixsecurity22/presentation/stevens.
Jinling Tang, Haixia Xu, Mingsheng Wang, Tao Tang, Chunying Peng, and
Huimei Liao. 2024. A flexible and scalable malicious secure aggregation protocol
for federated learning. Trans. Info. For. Sec., 19, (Jan. 2024), 4174–4187. doi:10.1
109/TIFS.2024.3375527.

,,

[42]

[43]
[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]
[50]

A

Antonella Del Pozzo, Achille Desreumaux, Mathieu Gestin, Alexandre Rapetti, and Sara Tucci

Georgia Tsaloli and Aikaterini Mitrokotsa. 2019. Sum it up: verifiable additive
homomorphic secret sharing. In Springer-Verlag, Seoul, Korea (Republic of),
115–132. isbn: 978-3-030-40920-3. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-40921-0_7.
Tim van Elsloo, Giorgio Patrini, and Hamish Ivey-Law. 2019. Sealion: a framework for neural network inference on encrypted data. (2019). arXiv: 1904.12840.
Ronan Wallace, Xabi Garcia Andrade, Pedro Kayser, Zhao Luo, Hrishav Mukherjee, Ruan Nunes, and Marc Warrior. 2024. Models of network delay. https://w
ww.amazon.science/publications/models-of-network-delay.
Guowen Xu, Hongwei Li, Sen Liu, Kan Yang, and Xiaodong Lin. 2020. Verifynet:
secure and verifiable federated learning. Trans. Info. For. Sec., 15, (Jan. 2020),
911–926. doi:10.1109/TIFS.2019.2929409.
Samuel Yeom, Irene Giacomelli, Matt Fredrikson, and Somesh Jha. 2018. Privacy
risk in machine learning: analyzing the connection to overfitting. In 2018 IEEE
31st computer security foundations symposium (CSF). IEEE, 268–282.
Hongxu Yin, Arun Mallya, Arash Vahdat, Jose M. Alvarez, Jan Kautz, and
Pavlo Molchanov. 2021. See through Gradients: Image Batch Recovery via
GradInversion. In 2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR). IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, (June
2021), 16332–16341. doi:10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.01607.
Zihao Zhou, Yanan Li, Xuebin Ren, and Shusen Yang. 2022. Towards efficient
and stable k-asynchronous federated learning with unbounded stale gradients
on non-iid data. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, 33, 12,
3291–3305. doi:10.1109/TPDS.2022.3150579.
Ligeng Zhu, Zhijian Liu, and Song Han. 2019. Deep leakage from gradients.
Article 1323, 11 pages.
Yuncong Zuo, Bart Cox, Lydia Y. Chen, and Jérémie Decouchant. 2024. Spyker:
asynchronous multi-server federated learning for geo-distributed clients. In
Proceedings of the 25th International Middleware Conference (Middleware ’24).

Open Science

• Sending the masked update with commitments to one aggregator: O (𝑁𝑔 ).
• Sending ping messages to the 𝑛𝑎 aggregators 𝑂 (1 ∗ 𝑛𝑎 )
• Sending one share of 𝑠 plus commitments on the polynomial
coefficients to each of the 𝑛𝑎 aggregators: O (𝑁𝑠 𝑛𝑎 ).
Total client bits complexity is O (𝑁𝑔 + 𝑁𝑠 𝑛𝑎 ), and client message
complexity is O (𝑛𝑎 ). Crucially, all client-side metrics depend on 𝑛𝑎
rather than 𝑛𝑐 , ensuring excellent scalability when 𝑛𝑎 ≪ 𝑛𝑐 .
Server-side. Each aggregator’s computation consists of:
• Intra-cluster aggregation of model updates for its O (𝑛𝑐 /𝑛𝑎 )
clients: O (𝑁𝑔 · 𝑛𝑐 /𝑛𝑎 ), summing across all 𝑛𝑎 aggregators
gives O (𝑁𝑔 𝑛𝑐 ).
• Inter-cluster aggregation among the 𝑛𝑎 aggregators: O (𝑁𝑔 𝑛𝑎 ).
• Reconstruction and verification of the secret shares of 𝑠 for
each client in its cluster: for each of the O (𝑛𝑐 /𝑛𝑎 ) clients,
reconstruction of the length-𝑁𝑠 vector requires O (𝑛𝑎2 ) operations per coordinate, giving O (𝑛𝑐 /𝑛𝑎 · 𝑁𝑠 · 𝑛𝑎2 ) = O (𝑁𝑠 𝑛𝑐 𝑛𝑎 )
in total.
Í
• Matrix-vector product 𝐴· 𝑠 for the aggregated mask: O (𝑁𝑔 𝑁𝑠 ).
Total server computational complexity is O (𝑁𝑔 𝑛𝑐 +𝑁𝑔 𝑛𝑎 +𝑁𝑠 𝑛𝑐 𝑛𝑎 +
𝑁𝑔 𝑁𝑠 ).
Server communication consists of:

The projects we built to test both the accuracy and the computational cost of our protocol are available at [5]. The repository is
composed of two folders. The first folder contains the material for
accuracy and parameter evaluation, while the second contains the
material for evaluating the computational cost of the cryptographic
primitives used throughout our protocol.
The CIFAR-5m dataset, which was used to provide each client
with more samples than the classical CIFAR-10 dataset, is available
at [32].

B

Detailed Complexity Analysis

This section provides a detailed analysis of the complexity figures
reported in Table 1, first for the protocol presented in this paper,
then for the other protocols presented in the table.

B.1

Our Protocol

Client-side. A client’s computation consists of the following operations:
• Generating the length-𝑁𝑠 secret vector 𝑠 and the length-𝑁𝑔
noise vector 𝑒𝑖 : O (𝑁𝑔 + 𝑁𝑠 ).
• Computing Shamir secret shares of 𝑠 for each of the 𝑛𝑎 aggregators, including commitments on the O (𝑛𝑎 ) polynomial
coefficients: O (𝑁𝑠 𝑛𝑎 ). Note that packed secret sharing as
used in FLDP [40] cannot be applied here, since the number
of shares 𝑛𝑎 is intended to be small relative to 𝑁𝑠 .
• Computing the matrix-vector product 𝐴 · 𝑠 for mask generation, where 𝐴 ∈ Z𝑁𝑔 ×𝑁𝑠 : O (𝑁𝑔 𝑁𝑠 ).
• Computing commitments on the masked update 𝑤𝑖 + 𝑒𝑖 of
length 𝑁𝑔 : O (𝑁𝑔 ).
Total client computational complexity is O (𝑁𝑠 𝑛𝑎 + 𝑁𝑔 𝑁𝑠 ), dominated by the mask generation matrix multiplication.
Client communication consists of:

• Broadcasting commitments on 𝑤𝑖 +𝑒𝑖 for its O (𝑛𝑐 /𝑛𝑎 ) clients
to the 𝑛𝑎 aggregators: O (𝑁𝑔 𝑛𝑐 ).
• Sending intra- and inter-cluster model updates to the 𝑛𝑎
aggregators: O (𝑁𝑔 𝑛𝑎 ).
• Forwarding secret shares of 𝑠 for its cluster clients to the 𝑛𝑎
aggregators: O (𝑁𝑠 𝑛𝑐 ).
• Sending client participation lists to the 𝑛𝑎 aggregators: O (𝑛𝑐 𝑛𝑎 ).
• Broadcasting the final aggregated model to all 𝑛𝑐 clients:
O (𝑁𝑔 𝑛𝑐 ).
Total server bits complexity is O (𝑁𝑔 (𝑛𝑐 + 𝑛𝑎 ) + 𝑛𝑐 (𝑁𝑠 + 𝑛𝑎 )), and
server message complexity is O (𝑛𝑎 + 𝑛𝑐 ).
In practice, rather than each aggregator pushing the final model
to all 𝑛𝑐 clients — which would multiply the O (𝑁𝑔 𝑛𝑐 ) broadcast
cost by 𝑛𝑎 — aggregators instead notify clients that the model is
available, and clients fetch it from any 𝑡𝑎 + 1 aggregators of their
choice. Since 𝑡𝑎 + 1 = O (𝑛𝑎 ), the client fetch cost is O (𝑁𝑔 𝑛𝑎 ). The
server notification cost is O (𝑛𝑐 ). Asymptotically, this optimization
does not change the complexity bounds, but significantly reduces
the practical communication burden on aggregators.

B.2

Baseline Protocols

Bonawitz et al. [10]. Each client communicates with all 𝑛𝑐 clients
for pairwise mask negotiation, giving client bits complexity O (𝑁𝑔 +
𝑛𝑐 ), message complexity O (𝑛𝑐 ), and computational complexity
O (𝑛𝑐 (𝑁𝑔 + 𝑛𝑐 )). The server aggregates all masked updates and reconstructs dropout seeds, giving server bits complexity O (𝑛𝑐 (𝑁𝑔 +
𝑛𝑐 )), message complexity O (𝑛𝑐 ), and computational complexity
O (𝑁𝑔 𝑛𝑐2 ). The quadratic terms in 𝑛𝑐 make this impractical at scale.
Bell et al. [8]. Replacing the complete graph with a 𝑘-regular
graph of degree O (log 𝑛𝑐 ) reduces client bits complexity to O (𝑁𝑔 +
log 𝑛𝑐 ), message complexity to O (log 𝑛𝑐 ), and computational complexity to O (log 𝑛𝑐 (𝑁𝑔 + log 𝑛𝑐 )). Server bits complexity becomes

Privacy-Preserving Federated Averaging with Byzantine Aggregators in Asynchronous Networks

O (𝑛𝑐 (𝑁𝑔 + log 𝑛𝑐 )), message complexity O (𝑛𝑐 ), and computational
complexity O (𝑛𝑐 (log2 𝑛𝑐 + 𝑁𝑔 log 𝑛𝑐 )).
FLDP [40]. Client bits complexity is O (𝑁𝑔 + 𝑁𝑠 + 𝑛𝑐 ), message
complexity O (𝑛𝑐 ), and computational complexity O (𝑛𝑐 log 𝑛𝑐 +
𝑁𝑔 𝑁𝑠 ), where the 𝑛𝑐 log 𝑛𝑐 term arises from the MPC protocol for
aggregating masks. Server bits complexity is O (𝑁𝑔 𝑛𝑐 +𝑁𝑠 ), message
complexity O (𝑛𝑐 ), and computational complexity O (𝑁𝑔 (𝑛𝑐 + 𝑁𝑠 ) +
𝑛𝑐 log 𝑛𝑐 ).
FlexScaAgg [41]. The original protocol uses exactly two entities
(server and initiator). Each client computes an E2 commitment on
its length-𝑁𝑔 gradient and sends its masked gradient to the server,
giving client bits complexity O (𝑁𝑔 ), message complexity O (1), and
computational complexity O (𝑁𝑔 ). The server receives masked gradients and commitments from all 𝑛𝑐 clients and interacts with the
initiator to compute the aggregation result, giving server bits complexity O (𝑁𝑔 𝑛𝑐 ), message complexity O (𝑛𝑐 ), and computational
complexity O (𝑁𝑔 𝑛𝑐 ).
In Table 1, we generalize FlexScaAgg to 𝑛𝑎 non-colluding entities
rather than fixing 𝑛𝑎 = 2, in order to enable a fair comparison
with our protocol. Under this generalization, each client must send
its masked gradient and commitments to each of the 𝑛𝑎 entities,
giving client bits complexity O (𝑁𝑔 𝑛𝑎 ), message complexity O (𝑛𝑎 ),
and computational complexity O (𝑁𝑔 𝑛𝑎 ). Server bits complexity
becomes O (𝑁𝑔 (𝑛𝑐 + 𝑛𝑎 )), message complexity O (𝑛𝑎 + 𝑛𝑐 ), and
computational complexity O (𝑁𝑔 (𝑛𝑐 + 𝑛𝑎 )).

B.3

Asymptotic Simplification

Under the practical assumptions 𝑛𝑎 = O (log 𝑛𝑐 ) and 𝑁𝑠 log 𝑛𝑐 =
𝑜 (𝑁𝑔 ) — which holds in practice since the LWE mask size 𝑁𝑠 is
typically a few hundred to a few thousand dimensions while 𝑁𝑔
reaches millions of parameters in modern FL deployments — the
complexities simplify as follows. The term 𝑁𝑠 𝑛𝑐 𝑛𝑎 = 𝑁𝑠 𝑛𝑐 log 𝑛𝑐
satisfies 𝑁𝑠 log 𝑛𝑐 = 𝑜 (𝑁𝑔 ), hence 𝑁𝑠 𝑛𝑐 𝑛𝑎 = 𝑜 (𝑁𝑔 𝑛𝑐 ) and is absorbed into O (𝑁𝑔 𝑛𝑐 ). Similarly, 𝑁𝑔 𝑛𝑎 = 𝑁𝑔 log 𝑛𝑐 = 𝑜 (𝑁𝑔 𝑛𝑐 ) and
𝑛𝑐 𝑛𝑎 = 𝑛𝑐 log 𝑛𝑐 are both dominated by 𝑁𝑔 𝑛𝑐 . This yields simplified
complexities matching those discussed in Section 3.

C

Complete algorithm and edge cases
management
C.1 Edge cases of the inclusion mechanism
In this section, we detail two edge cases of the inclusion algorithm
that were discussed in Section 6.3.
Wasted clusters. The assignment algorithm assigns clients to
aggregators in an expected uniformly random manner. Thus, each
round, some aggregators have a probability to be assigned to clients
that have crashed (or slow enough to appear as crashed). As our
privacy preservation mechanism requires aggregators to include a
fixed number (𝜌) of client updates to aggregate each round, when
more than 𝑘 − 𝜌 − 1 crashed clients are assigned to an aggregator
𝑎𝑖 , this aggregator will not be able to aggregate clients’ values this
round.
The solution for the aggregator is simply to inform other aggregators that it does not participate this round, and to wait for
the next round to start. Thanks to the expected random shuffling

,,

of assigned clients, in the next rounds, 𝑎𝑖 will be associated with
new clients, and, in expectation, it will receive at least 𝜌 model
updates. If a correct aggregator detects that it may be assigned
to a “wasted” cluster, i.e., if it did not receive 𝜌 gradients from
its assigned clients while it already received 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎 UNIFICATION
messages from the other aggregators, then it informs the others
that it will not participate during this round by sending a WASTED
message. This aggregator will still help the other aggregators in
the reconstruction of their cluster-level gradient, but it will not
send any SUM-SHARES message for its own cluster-level’s gradient.
A “wasted” aggregator at round 𝜏 still produces a model at round 𝜏
using the averaged gradients of other aggregators during the intercluster aggregation phase. Furthermore, once a WASTED message
is received by 𝑎𝑖 from an aggregator 𝑎 𝑗 , no aggregation request
nor cluster-level gradient will be waited from it. Therefore, this
mechanism does not impact non-wasted aggregators when they
train, and as shown in Section D, it does not impact overall training
accuracy.
Inclusion fraud detection. Byzantine processes can voluntarily
bias their client inclusion by including in priority some clients
rather than others, thereby biasing their own models due to data
heterogeneity, but also biasing others aggregators’ models in the
inter-cluster aggregation phase. To solve this problem, we add
a fraud detection mechanism. If an aggregator 𝑎𝑖 is detected by
another aggregator 𝑎 𝑗 as voluntarily biasing its inclusion of clients
during round 𝜏, then 𝑎 𝑗 will locally mark 𝑎 𝑗 as blamed. A correct
aggregator does not help a blamed aggregator to reconstruct and
aggregate its gradients during the intra-cluster aggregation stage. If
a correct aggregator blames another aggregator 𝑎𝑘 , either enough
correct aggregators blame 𝑎𝑘 , or 𝑎𝑘 proposed two different sets of
included clients. In the first case, the correct aggregators that detect
the bias will not participate in the reconstruction of the update.
Thus, 𝑎𝑘 will not be able to reconstruct its cluster-level gradient,
hence, it will not be able to introduce bias in the final result. In
the second case, either one of the set does not introduce bias, and
enough correct aggregators received it, thus 𝑎𝑘 will be seen as a
correct aggregator and its unbiased cluster-level gradient will be
reconstructed, or one of the sets is biased and as earlier, 𝑎𝑘 cannot
participate anymore this round.
To detect a fraudulent client inclusion, we compute the maximum difference between the least frequently included and the most
frequently included clients (Δ(𝜆)), allowing a tolerance of Δmax . If
an aggregator 𝑎𝑖 includes clients with an absolute difference that is
higher than Δmax , then, when it asks for summation of those clients’
gradients to the other correct aggregators, those aggregators, that
share the same view on which clients 𝑎𝑖 included in previous rounds
thanks to the 𝑛𝑎 > 3𝑡𝑎 threshold, will all locally blame 𝑎𝑖 . Thus, no
correct aggregator will help reconstruction 𝑎𝑖 intra-cluster update.
However, the inclusion algorithm we use is stochastic. Thus,
the blaming mechanism can also impact correct aggregators as
the probability they include biased clients in their sets is non zero.
To solve this problem, correct aggregators detect on their own set
of included clients if they can be perceived as fraudulent. If they
do, they declare themselves “AUTO-BLAMED” and wait for the
following round to be able to participate again, just as if their cluster
was wasted.

,,

C.2

Antonella Del Pozzo, Achille Desreumaux, Mathieu Gestin, Alexandre Rapetti, and Sara Tucci

Complete algorithm and detailed
description

In this section, we provide the complete privacy preserving learning
algorithm with replicated aggregators. This algorithm, is presented
in eight parts in Algorithms 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9.
C.2.1 Detailed client’s algorithm description. Algorithm 3 presents
client’s main algorithm. In this algorithm, the main function is
triggered when the client 𝑐𝑖 receives a TRAIN message at round
𝜏. This message includes the initial model if 𝜏 = 0 or the model
computed during the previous round 𝜏 − 1 and a proof of correct
computation of this model otherwise (line 16). 𝑐𝑖 first registers its
coordinator this round using the Assigned function (line 17). Then,
it computes a gradient on the model it received and on its local data
(line 18) and it invokes the CreateMaskedModel function.
The CreateMaskedModel function has two parts. The first part
of the function aims at hiding the client’s gradient, while the second
part is used to provide material to unmask this hidden client’s
gradient. In the first part of the CreateMaskedModel function, 𝑐𝑖
first generates 𝑠, the mask of the gradient and 𝑒, the DP noise (line
3). It then clips the gradient (line 4), i.e., it limits the maximum
norm of the gradient to the clipping parameter 𝐶, such that DP can
be ensured. Then, the noise and the mask are added to the clipped
gradient (line 5).
In the second part of the CreateMaskedModel function, 𝑐𝑖 creates 𝑛𝑎 shares of its mask 𝑠 (line 6). Those shares will later be
summed by the aggregators, and the sum of the shares will be interpolated to retrieve the sum of the masks of 𝜌 clients. This is
the main improvement that was proposed by FLDP [40] over other
secret sharing-based FL algorithms [8], as it reduces the size of
the vector we are working on. As shown in Section 7, 𝑠 has a size
𝑁𝑠 between 102 and 103 for 128 bit security and is independent
of the size 𝑁𝑔 of 𝑔. Therefore, we can work and exchange mostly
values related to 𝑠 rather than 𝑔 and reduce the overall communication and computation complexity of the protocol. Once the shares
have been computed, 𝑐𝑖 produces the two proofs PVAHSSProof and
PVAHSSPartialProof (lines 7 and 8). The first one is an additionally
homomorphic commitment to 𝑐𝑖 ’s unmasked (but noisy) gradient,
that will be used by the aggregators to ensure that cluster-level gradients are computed accordingly to the protocol. The second one is
an additionally homomorphic commitment to each share. It will be
used by 𝑎 𝑗 , the coordinator of 𝑐𝑖 ’s cluster, to ensure that no aggregator misbehave by sending a wrong sum of client’s shares. Those
proofs makes it possible to ensure that the Byzantine aggregators
cannot undermine neither liveness nor safety of the protocol.
Once the proofs have been computed, 𝑐𝑖 encrypts the data destined to each aggregator with their shared symmetric encryption
key (line 13). For each aggregator 𝑎𝑙 , 𝑐𝑖 encrypts the round number
𝜏, its identity, the secret share SecretShare[𝑙] of the mask 𝑠 destined to 𝑎𝑙 , and PVAHSSProof. 𝑐𝑖 adds a signature of those elements
to avoid tampering. This encrypted message will be sent to 𝑎𝑙 using
the coordinator 𝑎 𝑗 as a proxy. Therefore, 𝑎 𝑗 may perform attacks
such as replay attacks. To avoid this behaviour, the round number
and the client’s identity are encapsulated in the encrypted message.
The secret share, on the other hand, is encrypted to ensure that 𝑎 𝑗
is not able to reconstruct the unaggregated 𝑠 value, which would
break user’s privacy.

𝑐𝑖 signs ℎ to avoid a Byzantine coordinator from selecting an
arbitrary ℎ during the inter-cluster phase (line 14). This additional
signature is required as the PVAHSSProof only ensures that 𝑠 is well
reconstructed, but no information is given on the unmasked model.
Therefore, aggregators can verify integrity of the ℎ value shared
by the aggregator using 𝜎ℎ and they can legitimately compute the
unmasked sum of gradients.
ℎ, 𝜎ℎ , PVAHSSProof and PVAHSSPartialProof are sent to 𝑎 𝑗 , the
coordinator of 𝑐𝑖 ’s cluster for round 𝜏, using an UPDATE message.
Additionally, 𝑐𝑖 sends a signature of 𝜏 to 𝑐𝑖 to act as a PING message
that 𝑎 𝑗 will be able to share with other aggregators during the unification phase. Finally, 𝑐𝑖 sends a PING message to each aggregator
to help them detect if they can begin the intra-cluster aggregation
phase, or if they are wasted.

C.2.2 Detailed aggregator’s algorithm description. Algorithm 8 and
Algorithm 9 present2 aggregator’s main algorithm. The aggregator
𝑎𝑖 begins by invoking the Train() operation, which sends the first
TRAIN message to the clients, with an initial model that can either
be randomly selected, or that can be a parameter of the algorithm
(line 2).
Afterward, 𝑎𝑖 waits for PING and UPDATE messages. Once it receives a PING message, it stores the associated signature of the
round number to use it during the unification phase (line 4). PING
messages makes it possible for 𝑎𝑖 to know when 𝑛𝑐 − 𝑡𝑐 clients participated, thus it allows 𝑎𝑖 to know if it can still wait more message
from its cluster’s clients, or if it has to declare itself “WASTED”.
When 𝑎𝑖 receives an UPDATE message from client 𝑐 𝑗 , it first stores
all the element that it received (lines 6 to 11). Importantly, the
UPDATE message is also recorded as a PING (line 11). It contains a
𝜏
𝜎PING
element that is a signature of the round number by 𝑐 𝑗 . This
signature is important as 𝑐 𝑗 do not send a PING message to its
cluster’s coordinator. Hence, it allows 𝑎𝑖 to count the clients that
already participated in and outside its cluster.
Once this recording is done, 𝑎𝑖 checks if it can wait for more
messages from clients (line 12) by checking if it received at least
𝑛𝑐 − 𝑡𝑐 PING messages. If it is the case, 𝑎𝑖 begins the unification
phase (line 13) by sending a UNIFICATION message. The goal of this
message is to share with other aggregators the list of participating
clients. Because PING messages are sent after UPDATE messages by
clients and because clients cannot be Byzantine, once an aggregator
𝑎𝑘 knows a client from its cluster sent a PING message to another
aggregator, it knows that it will eventually receive the UPDATE
message from this client and that it can wait for it. This unification
phase makes it possible to avoid inter-locked situations where each
aggregator sees the PING messages of other aggregator’s clusters,
but none of them (or not enough to reach the 𝜌 threshold) are from
its cluster. When 𝑎𝑖 receives a UNIFICATION message, it verifies
the set of signature contained in the message, and it records each
unknown signature in its own pingList (lines 17 to 20).
Otherwise, if 𝑎𝑖 did not receive enough PING messages, it waits
for the additional clients’ participations that are ensured to eventually arrive thanks to our fault model.
Afterward, in both cases (lines 15 or 22), 𝑎𝑖 verifies if it received enough UNIFICATION messages, and if it did, it executes
the PrepareAggregation function.

Privacy-Preserving Federated Averaging with Byzantine Aggregators in Asynchronous Networks

,,

init: 𝐴 ← a public matrix of size 𝑛 × 𝑚 used to hide the update 𝑤𝑖 ;
𝐶 ← Clipping parameter.;
𝜏
2 Function CreateMaskedModel(𝑔𝑖 ) is
3
𝑠 ← GenerateRandomSecret( ); 𝑒 ← DrawRandomNoise( );
1

||𝑔𝑐𝜏 || 2

4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
13
14
15
16

𝑔¯𝑖𝜏 ← 𝑔𝑖𝜏 /max(1, 𝐶𝑖 );
ℎ ← 𝑔¯𝑖𝜏 + 𝐴 · 𝑠 + 𝑒;
SecretShares ← (𝑛𝑎 , 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎 )-SS.Share(𝑠 );
PVAHSSPartialProof[ 𝑗 ] ← Commit(SecretShare[ 𝑗 ] ), ∀ 𝑗 ∈ {1, · · · , 𝑛𝑎 };
PVAHSSProof ← Commit(𝑔𝑖𝜏 + 𝑒 );
encShares ← ∅𝑛𝑎 ;
for 𝑎 ℓ ∈ A do
encShares[ℓ ] ← PKCrypt.Encrypt( (𝜏, 𝑐𝑖 , SecretShares[𝑙 ], PVAHSSProof, DigSig.Sign( (
𝜏, 𝑐𝑖 , SecretShares, PVAHSSProof), SKSig𝑐𝑖 ) ), SKEnc (𝑎ℓ ,𝑐𝑖 ) );
𝜎ℎ ← DigSig.Sign(𝜏, ℎ, SKSig𝑐𝑖 );
Return (ℎ, 𝜎ℎ , encShares, PVAHSSProof, PVAHSSPartialProof);
c𝜏
, 𝜎𝜏
When TRAIN < 𝜏, 𝑊
proposed c𝜏

> is received do

𝑊

proposed

17
18
19
20
21

𝑎 𝑗 ← Assigned(𝜏, 𝑐𝑖 );
𝑔𝑖𝜏 ← ∇𝐹𝑖 (𝑤𝑖𝜏 −1 , 𝜉𝑖𝜏 );
(ℎ, 𝜎ℎ , encShares, PVAHSSProof, PVAHSSPartialProof) ← CreateMaskedModel(𝑔𝑖𝜏 );
Send UPDATE⟨𝜏, ℎ, 𝜎ℎ , DigSig.Sign(𝜏, SKSig𝑐𝑖 ), encShares, PVAHSSProof, PVAHSSPartialProof⟩ to aggregator 𝑎 𝑗 ;
Broadcast PING⟨𝜏, DigSig.Sign(𝜏, SKSig𝑐𝑖 ) ⟩ to all aggregators in A except 𝑎 𝑗 .

Algorithm 3: Asynchronous privacy preserving federated learning algorithm with aggregator fault resilience (for client 𝑐𝑖 ).
The goal of the PrepareAggregation function, presented in Algorithm 7, is to perform the inclusion mechanism on the participations
𝑎𝑖 received, and to prepare the material necessary for each aggregator to perform the intra-cluster aggregation. First 𝑎𝑖 verifies if it
received enough (𝜌) participations to require an aggregation using
the WastedDetection function (line 2). If it does not, it broadcasts
a WASTED message so that other aggregators do not wait for its
SUM-SHARES message. If 𝑎𝑖 received enough participations on the
other hand, it gathers them (lines 5 to 7). Then, it performs the
inclusion on this set of client (line 8) and verifies if the resulting
set fulfills the expected uniform inclusion of client thanks to the
InclusionFraudDetection function (line 11). This function checks if
the most included client and the least included client of 𝑎𝑖 have a difference of participation of more than Δmax . This function ensure that
no Byzantine process bias the inclusion mechanism. If the function
returns True, then correct aggregators may see 𝑎𝑖 as a Byzantine
aggregator. It therefore send an AUTO-BLAMING message, saying it
cannot participate this round. AUTO-BLAMING messages are treated
as WASTED messages. Otherwise, 𝑎𝑖 can proceed. It homomorphically sums the PVAHSSProof that are associated to participations
of included clients for later verification (line 17). Finally it prepares
each encrypted share for each aggregator, and sends it using a
SUM-SHARES message (lines 18 to 22).
When 𝑎𝑖 receives a SUM-SHARES message from 𝑎 𝑗 , it first waits
for the previous SUM-SHARES or WASTED or AUTO-BLAMING message
from 𝑎 𝑗 (line 24). This makes it possible to know which clients 𝑎 𝑗
selected in previous rounds, such that the inclusion fraud detection
mechanism can work. Afterward, 𝑎𝑖 verifies that 𝑎 𝑗 client inclusion is correct (lines 25 to 29), i.e., it first check that 𝑎 𝑗 included
exactly 𝜌 client’s updates, then it checks if the inclusion mechanism was properly performed using the InclusionFraudDetection

Function WastedDetection( ) is
partClients ← ∅;
3
for (𝑐𝑘 , ★, ★) ∈ pingList𝜏𝑖 do
4
If 𝑐𝑘 ∈ Assign(𝜏 ) [𝑖 ] then
partClients ← partClients ∪ 𝑐𝑘 ;

1

2

6

If |partClients| < 𝜌 and at least 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎 UNIFICATION
messages have been received then
Return True

7

Return False

5

Algorithm 4: Function to detect “wasted” clusters (for 𝑎𝑖 )

Function InclusionFraudDetection(𝜆) is
𝜆 ′ ← the 𝑛𝑐 − 2𝑡𝑐 most frequent values in 𝜆;
3
If Δ(𝜆 ′ ) > Δmax then Return True;
4
Return False

1

2

Algorithm 5: Blaming function where Δ(𝜆 ′ ) outputs the
maximum frequency difference in 𝜆 ′ (for 𝑎𝑖 )

Function Include(𝜆, 𝑆 ) is
𝑆 sorted ← 𝑆 sorted in ascending order from fewer to most
appearances in 𝜆;
3
If 𝑆 ≥ 𝜌 then Return the 𝜌 first elements of 𝑆 sorted ;
4
Return False

1

2

Algorithm 6: Inclusion function (code for 𝑎𝑖 ).
function. If those steps pass, 𝑎𝑖 updates the variable Λ𝑖 [ 𝑗] that
stores the frequency of inclusions of clients by 𝑎 𝑗 (line 30). Then,

,,

Antonella Del Pozzo, Achille Desreumaux, Mathieu Gestin, Alexandre Rapetti, and Sara Tucci

𝑎𝑖 decrypts the shares of clients selected by 𝑎 𝑗 using their shared
symmetric key (line 34). It sums the decrypted shares and the associated PVAHSSProof (lines 37 and 38). Finally, it threshold-signs
the sum of PVAHSSProof and sends everything back to 𝑎 𝑗 using a
INTRA-CLUSTER-RECONSTRUCTION message (lines 41 and 42).
The goal of the INTRA-CLUSTER-RECONSTRUCTION message is
for the aggregators to collect sum of shares of their cluster, and
combine those sum of shares to unveil the sum of unmasked gradients of their selected clients in their cluster. The first action 𝑎𝑖
takes when it receives an INTRA-CLUSTER-RECONSTRUCTION message from 𝑎 𝑗 is to verify the 𝜎proof signature, which is the threshold
signature by 𝑎 𝑗 of PVAHSSProof, and that will be used in the following phase by aggregators to verify that the intra-cluster phase was
conducted following the protocol. Those PVAHSSProof signatures
proves compliance to the protocol as 𝑎𝑖 is required to aggregate
at least 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎 of them, which implies that at least one correct aggregator did participate in the intra-cluster phase. Furthermore, 𝑎𝑖
verifies that the commitment to the sum of shares sent by 𝑎 𝑗 is equal
to the sum of commitments to shares (the PVAHSSPartialProof)
that was received from clients. This ensures that 𝑎 𝑗 summed the
shares and did not provide arbitrary elements which would modify the reconstructed gradient (line 48). Then, it stores the sum
of shares and the signature of the proofs until it receives 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎
valid INTRA-CLUSTER-RECONSTRUCTION messages (line 50). At this
point, 𝑎𝑖 reconstruct the sum of the masks 𝑠 (line 51) and combines the signatures to obtain a constant size proof of the good
reconstruction of the sum of 𝑠 values (line 52). Those elements
are finally broadcast to aggregators using a INTER-CLUSTER-SUM
message, along with the masked gradients ℎ of included clients
(maskedUpdates𝜏𝑖 ), and the signature by the clients of those masked
gradients (sigMaskedUpdates𝜏𝑖 ).
The aggregators now have to collect the sum of the unmask
gradients of other aggregators clusters, sum those different gradients and request a certification from other aggregators. This is
done when 𝑎𝑖 receives an INTER-CLUSTER-SUM message from 𝑎 𝑗 .
It verifies the signature 𝜎𝑠b𝜏𝑗 that certifies that at least one correct
aggregator participated in the intra-cluster phase, and thus that this
phase was conducted accordingly with the protocol, and that no
two different intra-cluster gradients exist for 𝑎 𝑗 ’s cluster (line 55).
Indeed, if 𝑎 𝑗 is able to build two different signatures 𝜎𝑠b𝜏𝑗 and 𝜎𝑠b′ 𝜏
𝑗

INTER-CLUSTER-SUM messages, it can compute its inter-cluster update (line 59) and send all the material that was used to compute
and verify the inter-cluster update to the other aggregators for
certification using a CERTIFY message.
The goal of the certification phase is to verify that the intercluster gradient was computed following the protocol. Namely,
it aims at verifying the same elements as in the previous phase,
and to threshold sign the model that has been produced in the
previous phase. The certification conducted during the certification
phase thus proves that the whole protocol was respected. When
the certification has passed, the threshold signature of the final
model is sent to the aggregator that requested it using a FINALIZE
message.
When 𝑎𝑖 receives a FINALIZE message, it saves the signature
that it contains. Once it received 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎 such signatures, it can
aggregate them. This aggregated signature proves that at least one
correct aggregator conducted the certification process, and that the
model signed was computed following the whole protocol. This
model can thus be used by clients in the following round 𝜏 + 1 to
produce a new update.
Function PrepareAggregation( ) is
If WastedDetection( ) = True then
3
Broadcast WASTED⟨𝜏 ⟩ to processes in A;
4
Return;

1

2

5
6
7

8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

16
17

𝜏

for two different intra-cluster gradients 𝑠b𝜏𝑗 and 𝑠b′ 𝑗 , it means 𝑎 𝑗 was
able to find two sets of 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎 aggregators willing to sign those two
different intra-cluster gradients. However, because correct aggregators will not sign two such different intra-cluster gradients, if we
assume 𝑛𝑎 −2𝑡𝑎 correct aggregators signed the intra-cluster gradient
𝑠b𝜏𝑗 , then only 𝑛𝑎 − (𝑛𝑎 − 2𝑡𝑎 ) = 2𝑡𝑎 < 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎 (as 𝑛𝑎 > 3𝑡𝑎 ) will sign
𝜏
the second inter-cluster gradient 𝑠b′ 𝑗 , thus the second aggregated
threshold signature cannot exist, and a Byzantine aggregator cannot equivocate. 𝑎𝑖 also verifies the signatures of the sum of masked
gradients to ensure no tampering was performed by 𝑎 𝑗 . Once those
verifications passed, 𝑎𝑖 stores the received elements until it receives
the maximum number of such INTER-CLUSTER-SUM messages it
can expect. 𝑎𝑖 can expect 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎 messages, but it has to take into account wasted and auto-blamed aggregators, and remove them from
the count. Therefore, once 𝑎𝑖 received 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎 − wastedcnt𝜏𝑖 valid

18
19
20
21

22

partClients ← ∅;
for (𝑐𝑘 , ★, ★) ∈ pingList do
If 𝑐𝑘 ∈ Assign(𝜏 ) [𝑖 ] then
partClients ← partClients ∪ 𝑐𝑘 ;;
S𝑖𝜏 ← Include(Λ𝜏𝑖 −1 [𝑖 ], partClients);
for 𝑐𝑘 ∈ partClients do
Λtmp ← Λ𝜏𝑖 −1 [𝑖 ] [𝑘 ] + 1;
If InclusionFraudDetection(Λtmp ) = True then
Broadcast AUTO-BLAMING⟨𝜏 ⟩ to processes in A;
Return;
Else
Wait until UPDATE messages are received from each client
in S𝑖𝜏 then
for 𝑐 𝑗 ∈ S𝑖𝜏 do
PVAHSSProof𝜏𝑖 ←
PVAHSSProof𝜏𝑖 ⊕ ProofStore𝜏𝑖 [ 𝑗 ];
for 𝑎𝑘 ∈ A do
TmpShares ← ∅;
for 𝑐 ℓ ∈ S𝑖𝜏 do
TmpShares ←
TmpShares ∪ encShares𝜏𝑖 [ℓ ] [𝑘 ];
Send SUM-SHARES⟨𝜏, S𝑖𝜏 , TmpShares⟩ to 𝑎𝑘 ;

Algorithm 7: Prepare aggregation function (code for 𝑎𝑖 )

C.3

Model sharing optimisation

In the previous section, the algorithm presented assumes all the
aggregators send their models to all the clients each round. This
behaviour is intended to avoid a situation where a Byzantine aggregator does not send any model at round 𝜏, and some crashed clients

Privacy-Preserving Federated Averaging with Byzantine Aggregators in Asynchronous Networks

init: 𝐴 ← a public matrix of size 𝑛 × 𝑚 used to hide the update 𝑤𝑖 ;
𝐶 ← Clipping parameter.;
Operation Train( ) is
2
Broadcast TRAIN⟨0,𝑊 0 , ∅ ⟩ to clients;

1

4

When PING⟨𝜏, 𝜎𝜏 ⟩ is received from client 𝑐 𝑗 do
pingList𝜏𝑖 ← pingList𝜏𝑖 ∪ (𝑐 𝑗 , 𝜏, 𝜎𝜏 );

5

𝜏 , PVAHSSProof𝜏 , PVAHSSPartialProof𝜏 ⟩ is received from client 𝑐 do
When UPDATE⟨𝜏, ℎ𝜏𝑗 , 𝜎ℎ𝜏 , encShares𝜏𝑗 , 𝜎PING
𝑗
𝑗
𝑗

3

𝑗

6
7

maskedUpdates𝜏𝑖 [ 𝑗 ] ← ℎ𝜏𝑗 ;
sigMaskedUpdates𝜏𝑖 [ 𝑗 ] ← 𝜎ℎ𝜏 ;
𝑗

8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

encShares𝜏𝑖 [ 𝑗 ] ← encShares𝜏𝑗 ;
PartialProofStore𝜏𝑖 [ 𝑗 ] ← PVAHSSPartialProof;
ProofStore𝜏𝑖 [ 𝑗 ] ← PVAHSSProof;
𝜏
pingList𝜏𝑖 ← pingList𝜏𝑖 ∪ (𝑐 𝑗 , 𝜎PING
);
𝜏
If |pingList𝑖 | ≥ 𝑛𝑐 − 𝑡𝑐 and UNIFICATION or SUM-SHARES have not been sent then
Broadcast UNIFICATION⟨𝜏, pingList𝜏𝑖 ⟩
If 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎 valid UNIFICATION messages have been received and at least 𝜌 TRAIN have been received this round then
PrepareAggregation( );

When UNIFICATION⟨𝜏, pingList𝜏𝑗 ⟩ is received from aggregator 𝑎 𝑗 do
17
If |pingList𝜏𝑗 | ≥ 𝑛𝑐 − 𝑡𝑐 then
𝜏
) ∈ pingList𝜏𝑗 do
18
for (𝑐𝑘 , 𝜎PING
𝜏 , 𝜏, PKSig ) = False then Return;
19
If DigSig.Verify(𝜎PING
𝑐𝑘

16

20
21
22

pingList𝜏𝑖 ← pingList𝜏𝑖 ∪ pingList𝜏𝑗 ;
If 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎 valid UNIFICATION messages have been received and at least 𝜌 TRAIN messages have been received this round then
PrepareAggregation( );

When SUM-SHARES⟨𝜏, S𝜏𝑗 , TmpShares⟩ is received from aggregator 𝑎 𝑗 do
24
Wait until SUM-SHARES⟨𝜏, ★, ★⟩ or WASTED⟨𝜏 ⟩ or AUTO-BLAMING⟨𝜏 ⟩ is received from 𝑎 𝑗 or 𝜏 = 0 then
25
If | S𝜏𝑗 | = 𝜌 and S𝜏𝑗 ⊆ Assign𝜏 [ 𝑗 ] then
26
𝜆tmp = Λ𝑖 [ 𝑗 ];
27
for 𝑐𝑘 ∈ S𝜏𝑗 do
28
Λtmp ← Λ𝜏𝑖 −1 [ 𝑗 ] [𝑘 ] + 1;

23

29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38

If InclusionFraudDetection(Λtmp = True) then Return;
Λ𝜏𝑖 −1 [ 𝑗 ] ← Λtmp ;
sumShares ← {0} 𝑁𝑠 ;
sumProofs ← {0} 𝑁𝑠 ;
for encShare ∈ TmpShares do
(𝜏, 𝑐𝑘 , share, PVAHSSProof, sig) ← PKCrypt.Decrypt(encShare, SKEnc (𝑎𝑖 ,𝑐𝑘 ) );
If not DigSig.Verify( (𝑐𝑘 , 𝜏, share, PVAHSSProof), PKSig (𝑐𝑖 ) = True then Return;
Stmp ← Stmp ∪ 𝑐𝑘 ;
sumProofs ← SumProofs ⊕ PVAHSSProof;
sumShares ← sumShares ⊕ share;

42

aggcnt𝜏𝑖 ← aggcnt𝜏𝑖 + 1;
If Stmp = S𝜏𝑗 then
𝜎proof ← ThreSig.Sign(SumProofs, SKThreSig𝑖 );
Send INTRA-CLUSTER-RECONSTRUCTION⟨𝜏, sumShares, 𝜎proof ⟩ to 𝑎 𝑗 ;

43

Else Return;

39
40
41

When WASTED⟨𝜏 ⟩ or AUTO-BLAMING⟨𝜏 ⟩ is received from aggregator 𝑎 𝑗 do
If no WASTED has been received from 𝑎 𝑗 then
46
wastedcnt𝜏𝑖 ← wastedcnt𝜏𝑖 + 1;

44

45

Algorithm 8: Privacy preserving asynchronous federated learning algorithm with aggregator fault resilience (for aggregator 𝑎𝑖 ). (Part
I)

,,

,,

Antonella Del Pozzo, Achille Desreumaux, Mathieu Gestin, Alexandre Rapetti, and Sara Tucci

When INTRA-CLUSTER-RECONSTRUCTION⟨𝜏, sumShares, 𝜎proof ⟩ is received from aggregator 𝑎 𝑗 do
Í
If Commit(sumShares) = Commit( 𝑘 ∈S𝜏 PartialProofStore𝜏𝑖 [𝑘 ] [ 𝑗 ]𝜏 ) ) and ThreSig.Verify(𝜎proof , PVAHSSProof𝜏𝑖 , PKThreSig 𝑗 ) then
𝑖
𝜏
49
StoredSumShares𝑖 ← StoredSumShares𝜏𝑖 ∪ {SumShares}; StoredSumProofs𝜏𝑖 ← StoredSumProofs𝜏𝑖 ∪ {𝜎proof }

47

48

50
51
52

If |StoredSumShares𝜏𝑖 | ≥ 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎 and no INTER-CLUSTER-SUM has been sent then
𝑠b𝑖𝜏 ← (𝑛𝑎 , 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎 )-PVAHSS.Recover(SumShareSet);
𝜎𝑠b𝜏 ← ThreSig.Combine(StoredSumProofs𝜏𝑖 );
𝑖

53

Broadcast INTER-CLUSTER-SUM⟨𝜏, maskedUpdates𝜏𝑖 , sigMaskedUpdates𝜏𝑖 , 𝑠b𝑖𝜏 , 𝜎𝑠b𝜏 ⟩ to processes in A;

54

When INTER-CLUSTER-SUM⟨𝜏, maskedUpdates𝜏𝑗 , sigMaskedUpdates𝜏𝑗 , 𝑠b𝜏𝑗 , 𝜎𝑠b𝜏 ⟩ is received from aggregator 𝑎 𝑗 do

𝑖

𝑗

55

If ThreSig.VerifyCombined(𝜎𝑠b𝜏 , Commit(b
𝑠 𝜏𝑗 ) ) = False or
𝑗

56

DigSig.Verify(sigMaskedUpdates𝜏𝑗 [ℓ ], (𝜏, maskedUpdates𝜏𝑗 [ℓ ] ), PKSig𝑐 ℓ ) = False∀ℓ ∈ C then Return;
finalSelec𝜏𝑖 ← finalSelec𝜏𝑖 ∪ { (𝑎 𝑗 , 𝑠b𝜏𝑗 , 𝜎𝑠b𝜏 , maskedUpdates𝜏𝑗 , sigMaskedUpdates𝜏𝑗 ) };
𝑗

57
58

If |finalSelec𝜏𝑖 | ≥ 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎 − wastedcnt𝜏𝑖 and no CERTIFY has been sent then
Í
Í
1
𝜏
b𝜏 ←
𝐺
(★,𝑠ˆ𝜏 ,★,maskedUpdates,★) ∈finalSelec𝜏 ( ℎ∈maskedUpdates ℎ) − 𝐴 · 𝑠ˆℓ ;
𝑖
𝜌 |finalSelec𝜏 |
𝑖

59
60
61

ℓ

𝑖

c𝜏 +1 = 𝑊
c𝜏 − 𝛾 𝜏 𝐺
b𝑎𝜏 ;
𝑊
𝑖
𝑖
𝑖
c𝜏 ⟩
Broadcast CERTIFY⟨𝜏, finalSelec𝜏𝑖 , 𝑊
𝑖
c𝜏 , 𝜎 𝜏 ⟩ is received from aggregator 𝑎 𝑗 do
When CERTIFY⟨𝜏, finalSelec𝜏𝑗 , 𝑊
𝑗
c𝜏
𝑊𝑗

62
63

Wait until CERTIFY⟨𝜏, ★, ★, ★⟩ is received from 𝑎 𝑗 or 𝜏 = 0 then
for (𝑎 ℓ , 𝑔ˆ𝜏ℓ , 𝜎𝑔b𝜏 , maskedUpdates𝜏ℓ , sigMaskedUpdates𝜏ℓ ) ∈ finalSelec𝜏𝑗 do
ℓ

64

c𝜏 ) = False or
𝑔𝜏ℓ ) ) = False or ThreSig.VerifyCombined(𝜎 𝜏c𝜏 ⟩, 𝑊
If ThreSig.VerifyCombined(𝜎𝑔b𝜏 , Commit(b
𝑗
ℓ

65

𝑗

66
67

𝑊𝑗

DigSig.Verify(sigMaskedUpdates𝜏ℓ [𝑘 ], (𝜏, maskedUpdates𝜏ℓ [𝑘 ] ), PKSig𝑐𝑘 ) = False∀𝑘 ∈ C then Return;
Í
Í
1
𝜏
b𝜏 ←
𝐺
(★,𝑠ˆ𝜏 ,★,maskedUpdates,★) ∈finalSelec𝜏 ( ℎ∈maskedUpdates ℎ) − 𝐴 · 𝑠ˆℓ ;
𝜌 |finalSelec𝜏 |
ℓ

𝑖

c𝜏 +1 = 𝑊
c𝜏 − 𝛾 𝜏 𝐺
b𝜏 ; 𝜎𝑊 ← ThreSig.Sign(𝑊
c𝜏 +1 , SKThreSig𝑖 );
𝑊
𝑗
𝑗
𝑗
Send FINALIZE⟨𝜏, 𝜎𝑊 ⟩ to 𝑎 𝑗

When FINALIZE⟨𝜏, 𝜎𝑊 ⟩ is received from aggregator 𝑎 𝑗 do
c𝜏 ) = True then
If a CERTIFY( ⟨𝜏, ★⟩ ) has been sent to 𝑎 𝑗 and DigSig.Verify(𝜎𝑊 , 𝑊
𝑖
70
sigSet𝑖 ← sigSet𝑖 ∪ 𝜎𝑊 ;
71
If |sigSet𝑖 | ≥ 𝑛𝑎 − 𝑡𝑎 and no TRAIN has been sent for round 𝜏 then
72
𝜎𝑊
c𝜏 +1 ← ThreSig.Combine(sigSet𝑖 );

68

69

𝑖

73

c𝜏 +1 , 𝜎 𝜏 +1 ⟩ to all clients.
Broadcast TRAIN⟨𝜏 + 1, 𝑊
𝑖
c𝜏 +1
𝑊𝑖

Algorithm 9: Asynchronous federated learning algorithm with aggregator fault resilience in the fully asynchronous communication
model (for aggregator 𝑎𝑖 ). (Part II)

are assigned to correct aggregators. In this case, correct aggregators
may never receive 𝑛𝑐 −𝑡𝑐 PING messages, thus impacting liveness of
the protocol. By sending models to all clients, correct aggregators
ensure that they will receive PING from all correct clients. However,
this behaviour is expensive in term of bit complexity, as models are
heavy.
To reduce the bit complexity, we can change the model sharing
mechanism from a “push” mechanism, where aggregators broadcast
their models, to a “pull” mechanism, where aggregators advertise
clients that a new model is available through a ModelAvailable
message, and clients then require this model to some specific aggregators.
More precisely, when an aggregator begins a new round, it still
sends the new model to the clients in its cluster, but it only sends a
ModelAvailable⟨𝜏⟩ message to clients outside of its cluster. When
a client receives such message, and if it did not already begin training for round 𝜏, it requests 𝑡𝑎 + 1 aggregators of its choice to send

their models. Therefore, the client is ensured to eventually receive
a model for round 𝜏, while reducing bit complexity.

D Additional Experimental Details and Results
D.1 Model Architectures
We use two convolutional neural networks.
CNN-MNIST (≈27,000 parameters): two convolutional blocks
(3 × 3 kernels, 8 and 16 output channels respectively), each followed
by 2×2 max-pooling, then two fully-connected layers (784→32→10).
ReLU activations throughout.
CNN-CIFAR (≈550,000 parameters): three pairs of convolutional
layers (3 × 3, 3 → 32 → 32 → 64 → 64 → 128 → 128 channels),
each followed by GroupNorm (8 groups) and 2×2 max-pooling after
each pair, then two fully-connected layers (2048→128→10). GroupNorm replaces BatchNorm because clients may train with batch
size 1, which makes BatchNorm statistics degenerate; GroupNorm
is unaffected by batch size.

Privacy-Preserving Federated Averaging with Byzantine Aggregators in Asynchronous Networks

,,

Figure 7: Accuracy over rounds for 𝜖 ∈ {1, 3, 5, 8} on MNIST and 𝜖 ∈ {3, 5, 8, 10} on CIFAR-5m (𝜌 = 128, 𝑁 = 1500). Each sub-panel
corresponds to one value of 𝜖. Our protocol converges across the full range on MNIST; the baseline fails to make progress at
𝜖 ≤ 3. The no-DP reference converges near-instantly in all panels.

Figure 8: Actual worst-case 𝜖 accumulated over rounds for the same experiment on MNIST (top) and CIFAR-5m (bottom). The
dashed horizontal line marks the target 𝜖 for each panel. Both our protocol and the baseline remain within their respective
budgets; the homogeneous-delays configuration exceeds the target at small 𝜖 (visible as curves crossing the dashed line).

D.2

Full Convergence Trajectories and Privacy
Budget Consumption

The figures in this section complement the main body’s maximum
accuracy summaries of Section 7.2.3 by showing, for each of the
three experiments, the full accuracy-over-rounds curves and the
actual privacy budget consumed per round. Each figure pairs results

for MNIST (top) with result for CIFAR-5m (bottom). In all accuracy
plots, solid lines are means over repetitions, inner bands (±std)
capture run-to-run variability, and outer bands (for 𝑡𝑎 > 0) span
the fastest to the slowest aggregator within a single run.

,,

Antonella Del Pozzo, Achille Desreumaux, Mathieu Gestin, Alexandre Rapetti, and Sara Tucci

Figure 9: Accuracy over rounds for 𝜌 ∈ {16, 32, 64, 128} (𝜖 = 5, 𝑁 = 1500) on MNIST (top) and CIFAR-5m (bottom).

Figure 10: Actual 𝜖 consumed over rounds for varying 𝜌 on MNIST (top) and CIFAR-5m (bottom).
D.2.1 Varying the Privacy Budget 𝜖. Figure 7 shows how accuracy
trajectories evolve across 𝜖 values. For large 𝜖 (low noise), all configurations converge quickly to similar final accuracy. As 𝜖 decreases,
the performance gap widens sharply. We see that increasing the
number of aggregators increases the fault tolerance, but decreases
the performance and results in a lower accuracy, due to the additional noise required for Byzantine fault tolerance. On CIFAR-5m,
the range shown is 𝜖 ∈ {3, 5, 8, 10}, where the model is already
difficult enough that 𝜖 = 1 yields no useful training for any configuration. The bands for 𝑡𝑎 > 0 configurations widen at low 𝜖: the

stochastic nature of which aggregator first accumulates enough
well-aligned gradient updates causes significant spread between
the fastest and slowest aggregator within a single run.
Budget consumption. Figure 8 shows the realized 𝜖 budget consumption per round. A few key observations require careful interpretation.
Both our protocol and the baseline (𝑡𝑎 = 0, no inclusion) remain
within their respective target budgets throughout the 300-round
window for mnist (respectively 200 rounds for cifar) — by design,
since each is calibrated independently for its own worst case. Our

Privacy-Preserving Federated Averaging with Byzantine Aggregators in Asynchronous Networks

,,

Figure 11: Accuracy over rounds for 𝑛𝑐 ∈ {300, 600, 1050, 1500} (𝜖 = 5, 𝜌 = 32) on MNIST (top) and CIFAR-5m (bottom).

Figure 12: Actual 𝜖 consumed over rounds for varying 𝑛𝑐 on MNIST (top) and CIFAR-5m (bottom).
protocol displays lower realized 𝜖 than the baseline (e.g., ≈ 3.05 vs.
≈ 3.54 after 200 rounds at 𝜖 = 5), but this gap is partly an artifact of
the experimental setup: client crashes are not simulated. Therefore,
clients are included less aggressively than in the worst possible case.
The baseline, by contrast, has its worst case realized naturally by
the biased selection of fast clients. The correct reading is therefore
not that our protocol “wastes” less budget, but that both protocols
meet the stated (𝜖, 𝛿)-DP guarantee, and neither consumes its full
budget in practice.

The homogeneous-delays configuration uses the same noise calibration as our protocol, since it was designed to share the same DP
accounting. However, without the inclusion mechanism, nothing prevents certain clients from being selected disproportionately, even
when all delays are drawn from the same distribution. This causes
the realized 𝜖 to grow faster than calibrated, and for small 𝜌 the
budget is violated well before 300 rounds for MNIST (respectively
200 rounds for cifar) (e.g., 𝜖 ≈ 6.25 after 200 rounds at 𝜌 = 16,
hitting the 𝜖 = 5 target at round 77). This is not an indictment of
homogeneous delays as a scenario — it shows that the inclusion

,,

Antonella Del Pozzo, Achille Desreumaux, Mathieu Gestin, Alexandre Rapetti, and Sara Tucci

Figure 13: Top: accuracy over rounds for 𝑑𝑞 ∈ {5, 10, 15, 20, 30} samples per client on CIFAR-5m (𝜖 = 8, geo-distributed split,
𝜌 = 128). Bottom: accuracy over rounds for 𝑑𝑞 ∈ {100, 500, 1000} samples per client on CIFAR-5m (𝜖 = 8, geo-distributed split,
𝜌 = 128).

Figure 14: Training of the MNIST dataset with simulation of crash from 1 aggregator (left), 2 aggregators (center) and 3
aggregators (right).
mechanism is what makes the DP guarantee hold: it is the mechanism that enforces the uniform selection probability ≈ 𝜌/𝑁 that
the noise calibration assumes. In a normal settings, the calibration
of noise for the homogenous delays should be the same as for the
baseline without selection, which would occurs poor performance
in accuracy.

D.2.2 Varying the number 𝜌 of included clients. Figure 9 illustrates
the effect of the parameter 𝜌 on convergence. Larger 𝜌 consistently
accelerates convergence for all configurations, since more gradient
updates are incorporated per round. For our protocol, we see that
the number of rounds to convergence to 80% accuracy with the
MNIST dataset increases at every tested value: 102 rounds for 𝜌 = 16
and 57 rounds for 𝜌 = 128. The baseline only converges to 80%
accuracy with 𝜌 = 128 and fails at all smaller values, confirming
that it cannot recover from the noise for small 𝜌 parameters. The
𝑡𝑎 = 2 configuration shows the strongest sensitivity to 𝜌: at 𝜌 = 16,
convergence to 80% accuracy requires nearly 300 rounds, while at
𝜌 = 128 it reaches 80% accuracy in 66 rounds.

Budget consumption. Figure 10 shows that 𝜌 has a notable effect
on budget consumption, particularly for the homogeneous-delays
configuration. At 𝜌 = 16, homogeneous delays hits 𝜖 = 5 at round 77
(𝜖 ≈ 6.25 after 200 rounds), a severe budget violation. The violation
shrinks as 𝜌 grows: at 𝜌 = 64 it hits the target at round 198, and
at 𝜌 = 128 the budget is just barely respected (𝜖 ≈ 4.52 after
200 rounds). The interpretation is that with small 𝜌, the random
fluctuations in client selection cause the effective sampling rate
to be dominated by a few over-selected clients; as 𝜌 grows, the
selection becomes empirically more uniform, mitigating the issue.
Our protocol and the baseline both remain within budget for all
tested 𝜌, confirming the earlier reading: both are calibrated for their
own worst case and the guarantees hold.
D.2.3 Varying the number of clients 𝑛𝑐 . Figure 11 confirms the robustness of our protocol to population size. For 𝑡𝑎 = 0, convergence
speed to 80% accuracy remains stable on MNIST at 62–69 rounds
across 𝑛𝑐 ∈ {300, 600, 1050, 1500}, showing that the protocol’s convergence is governed by the fraction of clients selected per round
(𝜌/𝑛𝑐 = 32/𝑛𝑐 ), not the absolute number of clients. The baseline

Privacy-Preserving Federated Averaging with Byzantine Aggregators in Asynchronous Networks

,,

Figure 15: Impact of aggregator’s Byzantine behaviour on the accuracy without the fraud detection mechanism (left) and with
the fraud detection mechanism (right). Results on the MNIST dataset (top) and the CIFAR-5m dataset (bottom).
fails to converge at any 𝑛𝑐 value, highlighting that the selection
bias cannot be resolved by adding more clients alone. The 𝑡𝑎 = 2
variant is the only configuration sensitive to 𝑛𝑐 : with 𝑛𝑐 = 300, the
model does not converge to 80% accuracy within 200-round.

Budget consumption . Figure 12 shows budget consumption as
𝑛𝑐 varies. As in the previous figures, both our protocol and the
baseline remain within their respective targeted budgets for all
𝑛𝑐 values. The differences in term of budget consumption across
different 𝑛𝑐 values are small. At round 100, our protocol ranges
from ≈ 2.07 for 𝑛𝑐 = 300 and to ≈ 2.40 for 𝑛𝑐 = 1500; the baseline
is stable at ≈ 2.41 in any configuration. We conclude that 𝑛𝑐 has
little effect on per-round privacy budget once 𝜌 is fixed, since the
noise calibration is dominated by the worst-case inclusion behavior
rather than by the amplification from a specific amount of clients.
The homogeneous-delays curve shows analogous budget pressure
as in the experiments on the parameter 𝜌 for the same structural
reason: without the inclusion mechanism, uniform selection is not
guaranteed.

D.3

Influence of the amount of Data held by
Clients

This experiment varies the number of training samples per client 𝑑𝑞
on MNIST and CIFAR-5m (𝜖 = 8, 𝑁 = 1500, 𝜌 = 128, geo-distributed
split).
Figure 13 shows that increasing per-client data volume (𝑑𝑞 ) consistently accelerates convergence for all configurations. Crucially,
our protocol maintains a clear advantage over the baseline at every
tested value of 𝑑𝑞 : even at the lowest data volumes, the inclusion
mechanism continues to reduce the effective noise through DP amplification by subsampling, independently of how much data each
client possesses. The gap between our protocol and the baseline
is driven by the noise multiplier ratio, not by the gradient quality,
so varying 𝑑𝑞 does not alter the relative ordering of the curves —
it only shifts all curves together toward faster or slower convergence. This confirms that the advantage demonstrated in the main
paper is not specific to high-data regimes and holds robustly across
data-scarce settings.

,,

Antonella Del Pozzo, Achille Desreumaux, Mathieu Gestin, Alexandre Rapetti, and Sara Tucci

detection mechanism on the maximum accuracy of the training.
This is probably due to the fact that, in the scenario without fraud
detection, correct aggregators average the behaviour of the Byzantine behaviour, whose impact is therefore reduced. Overall, we can
see that the inclusion fraud detection mechanism is a necessary
mechanism as it makes it possible to have a smoother training.

Figure 16: Number of times each aggregator included each
client, sorted from least to most included client, with aggregator 1 exhibiting a Byzantine behaviour.

D.4

Impact of aggregators crash

One of the Byzantine behaviour that aggregators can exhibit is a
simulation of crash, i.e., they cease to participate in the protocol.
We tested this setup by letting 𝑡𝑎 aggregators simulate a crash
after round 10 with the MNIST dataset in a similar setting as the
geodistributed setting presented in Section 7, with 𝑛𝑐 = 1500, 𝑟ℎ𝑜 =
128, 𝑡𝑐 = 374, and no differential privacy.
The results of this experimentation are shown in Figure 14. When
an aggregator crashes, it cease to send messages to clients and
aggregators, and we set its accuracy to 0. As we can see, with 1,
2, or 3 crash, the crash of an aggregator does not impact the final
accuracy of the correct aggregators.

D.5

Inclusion fraud detection impact on
training

In this section, we want to experimentally analyze the inclusion
fraud detection mechanism presented in Section C.1. To do so, we
simulated a Byzantine behaviour, where an aggregator voluntarily bias its included clients to include in priority fastest clients.
To increase the impact of this bias, we place this experimentation
in the geodistributed setup presented in Section 7. Therefore, the
Byzantine aggregator effectively tries to bias the model of all aggregators by only including clients with biased data (in this case,
it only included clients with samples from the 5 first classes). The
difference between the clients included by correct and Byzantine
aggregators can be seen in Figure 16. This figure shows, for each
aggregator, the number of time it included each client, sorted from
the least included client to the most included client. It is clear that
correct aggregators have an uniform inclusion policy whereas the
Byzantine aggregator (aggregator 2) has a clearly biased inclusion
policy.
In Figure 15, we show the difference between an execution with
this type of Byzantine behaviour with and without the inclusion
fraud detection mechanism both on the MNIST and CIFAR-5m
dataset. The main impact of such Byzantine behaviour on the accuracy is visible as, without the fraud detection mechanism, accuracy
lines are way more jagged than its fraud detection counterpart. This
is due to the fact that the Byzantine aggregator draws everyone
down. However, we cannot see a clear impact of the inclusion fraud

