JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 00, NO. 0, SEPTEMBER 0000

1

Mitigating Backdoor Attacks in Federated Learning
Using PPA and MiniMax Game Theory

arXiv:2603.28652v1 [cs.LG] 30 Mar 2026

Osama Wehbi, Sarhad Arisdakessian, Omar Abdel Wahab, Anderson Avila, Azzam Mourad, Hadi Otrok

Abstract—Federated Learning (FL) is witnessing wider adoption due to its ability to benefit from large amounts of scattered
data while preserving privacy. However, despite its advantages,
federated learning suffers from several setbacks that directly
impact the accuracy, and the integrity of the global model it
produces. One of these setbacks is the presence of malicious
clients who actively try to harm the global model by injecting
backdoor data into their local models while trying to evade
detection. The objective of such clients is to trick the global
model into making false predictions during inference, thereby
compromising the integrity and trustworthiness of the global
model on which honest stakeholders rely. To mitigate such
mischievous behavior, we propose FedBBA (Federated Backdoor
and Behavior Analysis). The proposed model aims to dampen the
effect of such clients on the final accuracy, creating more resilient
federated learning environments. We engineer our approach
through the combination of (1) a reputation system to evaluate
and track client behavior, (2) an incentive mechanism to reward
honest participation and penalize malicious behavior, and (3)
game theoretical models with projection pursuit analysis (PPA) to
dynamically identify and minimize the impact of malicious clients
on the global model. Extensive simulations on the German Traffic
Sign Recognition Benchmark (GTSRB) and Belgium Traffic Sign
Classification (BTSC) datasets demonstrate that FedBBA reduces
the backdoor attack success rate to approximately 1.1%–11%
across various attack scenarios, significantly outperforming stateof-the-art defenses like RDFL and RoPE, which yielded attack
success rates between 23% and 76%, while maintaining high
normal task accuracy (∼95%–98%).
Index Terms—Cybersecurity, Federated Learning (FL), Backdoor Attacks, Game Theory, Reputation System, Projection
Pursuit Analysis (PPA)

I. I NTRODUCTION
Federated learning (FL) enables collaborative model training across distributed clients while keeping data locally on
devices, thus preserving privacy and reducing centralized data
storage requirements. [1]. This framework not only preserves
user privacy but also leverages edge device capabilities, making it vital for applications such as healthcare, finance, and
Osama Wehbi is with the Department of Computer and Software Engineering, Polytechnique Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada (e-mail:
osama.wehbi@etud.polymtl.ca).
Sarhad Arisdakessian is with the Department of Computer and Software
Engineering, Polytechnique Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada (e-mails:
sarhad.arisdakessian@etud.polymtl.ca).
Omar Abdel Wahab is with the Department of Computer and Software
Engineering, Polytechnique Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada (e-mails:
omar.abdul-wahab@polymtl.ca).
Anderson Avila is with the Institut national de la recherche scientifique
(INRS-EMT), Montréal, Canada (e-mail: Anderson.Avila@inrs.ca).
Azzam Mourad is with the Department of Computer Science, Khalifa
University, Abu Dhabi, UAE, as well as the Artificial Intelligence & Cyber
Systems Research Center, Department of CSM, Lebanese American University (e-mails: azzam.mourad@ku.ac.ae).
Hadi Otrok is with the Department of Computer Science, Khalifa University, Abu Dhabi, UAE (e-mails: hadi.otrok@ku.ac.ae).

autonomous driving. Despite these benefits, FL inherits unique
security challenges, particularly its vulnerability to backdoor
attacks. These attacks exploit the training process to implant
malicious behaviors in models that are activated by specific
triggers, such as pixel modifications or hidden patterns in the
input data [2]. For instance, in autonomous vehicles (AVs), a
trigger embedded in traffic sign images could lead to misclassifications, jeopardizing safety-critical systems. Such attacks
aim to manipulate the model’s behavior while remaining
undetected during training, allowing malicious functionality
to coexist with otherwise normal model performance. The
decentralized nature of FL further exacerbates these challenges. Clients often possess limited or imbalanced datasets
that may not fully represent the global data distribution.
As a result, clients may incorporate external data during
local training, increasing the potential for backdoor attacks.
Malicious participants can exploit this setting by injecting
poisoned data or embedding triggers into their local training
process. Moreover, backdoor attacks can be carried out in
multiple forms, including single or multiple attempts, coordinated attacks across several clients, targeted (one-to-one),
untargeted (one-to-many), and multi-trigger scenarios. These
attacks are particularly difficult to detect due to their stealthy
design and the high dimensionality of deep learning models.
Another major challenge arises from the federated aggregation
process itself. Since only model updates are shared with the
server rather than raw data, it becomes difficult to identify
and isolate malicious contributions. Traditional evaluation metrics such as accuracy and precision primarily assess overall
model performance but often fail to capture hidden malicious
behaviors embedded within the model [3]. Consequently, a
model may maintain high accuracy on benign inputs while
still containing covert backdoor functionality. Although several
defense mechanisms have been proposed to address backdoor
attacks in federated learning, many existing approaches focus
primarily on scalability and complexity, and some introduce
additional privacy concerns. More importantly, most solutions
treat participating clients as static entities and overlook the
dynamic behavior and evolving motivations of both honest
and malicious participants during the training process. This
limitation restricts their ability to adapt to changing attack
strategies. In addition, many existing defenses are designed to
address only specific forms of attacks, particularly one-to-one
backdoor attacks, while overlooking other types that can be
equally harmful.
To address these challenges, we propose FedBBA (Federated
Backdoor and Behavior Analysis), a framework designed to
enhance the security and reliability of federated learning systems. The proposed approach integrates statistical analysis, a

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 00, NO. 0, SEPTEMBER 0000

reputation-based evaluation mechanism, and game-theoretical
modeling to dynamically detect and mitigate malicious client
behavior. In particular, our framework leverages Projection
Pursuit Analysis (PPA) with kurtosis scores to identify suspicious model updates, while a reputation mechanism continuously evaluates client behavior over multiple training rounds.
Furthermore, we model the interaction between the federated
server and potentially malicious clients as a non-cooperative
MiniMax game, where malicious clients attempt to maximize
the impact of backdoor attacks while the server aims to
minimize their influence on the global model. Based on this
framework, the federated server assigns adaptive weights to
client updates according to their PPA scores, reputation values,
and gradient differences, thereby reducing the influence of
suspicious or malicious contributions while preserving the
benefits of collaborative learning. Through extensive simulations using real-world datasets, including GTSRB and BTSC,
we demonstrate that FedBBA significantly reduces backdoor
attack success rates while maintaining high model accuracy
and outperforming existing state-of-the-art approaches.
This work contributes to advancing secure federated learning by addressing the dynamic nature of client behavior
and providing a more comprehensive defense against diverse
backdoor attack strategies. By improving the robustness and
trustworthiness of federated models, our approach supports the
safe deployment of FL in safety-critical domains.
A. Contributions
The main contributions of this work are summarized as
follows:
1) Develop a novel federated learning framework based
on non-cooperative MiniMax games, incorporating PPA
scores, reputation scores, and differences in local model
gradients to dynamically adapt to client behavior and
model updates, with the objective of assigning optimal
weights to minimize the impact of malicious clients.
2) Leverage a reputation mechanism to evaluate client behavior dynamically, rewarding honest clients and penalizing malicious ones, thereby enhancing the robustness
of the global model against backdoor attacks.
3) Utilize Projection Pursuit Analysis (PPA) with Kurtosis
scores, coupled with a reputation mechanism, to identify
possible suspicious client updates and mitigate their
impact on the global model by reducing the influence
of backdoored contributions.
4) Design the proposed solution to be generic enough to
address different types of attacks, including one-to-one
and one-to-many scenarios, which are often overlooked
by existing works.
B. Paper Outline
Section II reviews the related work on backdoor attack
detection and mitigation strategies in FL. Section III discusses
the main concepts and methods used in this research. Section IV formulates the core problem of backdoor attacks in FL
and discusses their impact on model integrity and performance.

2

The system architecture and PPA methodology for mitigating anomalous model updates are presented in Section V,
while Section VI details the MiniMax game framework and
the decision-making process used to reduce the influence of
suspicious clients. Section VII describes the implementation
of FedBBA and its operation across multiple training rounds.
Section VIII reports the experimental results, evaluating the
effectiveness of FedBBA using real-world datasets and comparing its performance with state-of-the-art methods in terms
of model accuracy and backdoor attack success rates. Finally,
Section IX concludes the paper and outlines potential directions for future research.
II. R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we provide an overview of the existing
literature on the detection and mitigation strategies of backdoor attacks in federated learning. Additionally, we highlight
the distinct contributions of our approach compared with the
reviewed works.
The authors of [4] propose a security mechanism against
backdoor attacks in federated learning using Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) and knowledge distillation. The
approach compare the performance of a clean model trained on
clean data (teacher) with a global model trained on aggregated
data (student). To reduce the probability of backdoor attacks,
the authors of [5] propose a distributed method to prune
neurons. Clients measure neuron activation and submit local
pruning sequences to the server, which aggregates them to
eliminate less-used neurons, enhancing model performance.
Modeling the backdoor problem as a coalitional game theory,
the authors of [6] measure participant performance using
their data’s influence on the aggregated model, distinguishing
benign and backdoored models via Shapley value. Addressing
attacker behavior fluctuations, the authors of [7] introduce a
MiniMax game strategy where the server generates authentic
client ratings to adjust model weights, reducing the influence
of compromised clients. In [8], the authors propose an anomaly
detection framework that uses conditional variational autoencoders (CVAE) to identify benign and malicious updates,
leveraging the majority of benign clients to distinguish updates
effectively. The authors of [9] describe a federated learning
system where an anomaly detector trained on adversarial data
discards malicious updates. In [10], the authors introduce
FedSV, a Byzantine-robust framework utilizing Shapley values
to quantify client contributions and eliminate malicious clients,
though it is sensitive to noise. Similarly, the authors of [11]
propose FLPurifier, which uses decoupled contrastive training
to detect and remove backdoored data. However, computational requirements and communication overhead limit its
scalability. The authors of [12] propose Model Anomalous
Activation Behavior Detection (MAABD), monitoring neural
network activation patterns to detect deviations and identify
malicious tampering. In [13], the authors introduce a max-min
security game approach that assigns adaptive weights based
on client trust and data quality. This ensures updates from
malicious clients have less influence, though computational
overhead limits practicality in certain FL environments. Dimensionality reduction techniques have also been explored for

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 00, NO. 0, SEPTEMBER 0000

detecting backdoored models. The authors of [14] introduce
RoPE, which employs Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to
identify anomalous updates based on distinct principal components, though its effectiveness depends on the backdoor’s
strength as well as the data distribution, which can lead to
the exclusion of benign models. In [15], the authors propose
RDFL to mitigate backdoor attacks in federated learning.
The method combines adaptive hierarchical clustering with
cosine-distance-based anomaly detection. Suspicious updates
are removed, followed by adaptive clipping and noising to
suppress poisoned local models. However, RDFL is sensitive
to data distribution and distance metrics; additionally, model
clipping may negatively affect accuracy. The authors of [16]
use Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) to analyze singular values of model updates, capturing linear structures but
overlooking complex backdoor patterns. While the reviewed
approaches show potential, many rely on single detection
metrics, leaving them vulnerable to sophisticated attacks.
Others fail to address the decentralized nature of federated
learning, limiting their applicability. Most solutions target
basic backdoor types, neglecting adaptive strategies. Privacy
concerns emerge in methods requiring sensitive client data,
and many treat attacker behavior as static, reducing resilience
to evolving threats.
Our proposal addresses these gaps by leveraging Projection
Pursuit Analysis to detect abnormal similarities among local
models. The MiniMax game framework dynamically counters
attackers, while the reputation system enhances decisionmaking. This multifaceted approach provides a comprehensive
solution to mitigating malicious clients in federated learning.
TABLE I
N OTATION S UMMARY
Symbol
N
T
t
Di
Di′
x j , yj
M(t)
(t)
Mi
wi
τ, τk
yja
L, R
X, V, S
Ri (t)
Hi (t), Gi (t)
α, β
gij , gi
γ, δ
ρi
I′
si
U (F ), U (A)
Φ(ρi , τ )
θ, λ
λ∗
Rmax

Description
Number of participating clients.
Total communication rounds.
Current round index.
Local dataset of client i.
Poisoned dataset of client i.
Input sample and true label.
Global model at round t.
Local model update from client i.
Aggregation weight of client i.
Backdoor trigger and trigger intensity.
Target label for backdoor attack.
Loss and regularization functions.
Data matrix, projection vectors and PPA scores.
Reputation score of client i.
Historical behavior and gradient variation scores.
Weights for reputation components.
Gradient at round j and mean gradient.
Reward and penalty factors.
Poisoning ratio of client i.
Set of compromised clients.
PPA anomaly score of client i.
Utility functions of server and attacker.
Backdoor impact function.
Similarity threshold and defense sensitivity parameter.
Optimal defense sensitivity chosen by the server at equilibrium
Upper bound on any client’s reputation score

III. SYSTEM PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we introduce the main concepts used in our
framework, including the federated learning process and Pro-

3

jection Pursuit Analysis (PPA) with kurtosis-based anomaly
detection.
A. Federated Learning
Federated learning is a decentralized machine learning approach that allows multiple clients to collaboratively train a
model without sharing their raw data. Let Di denote the dataset
of client i, M the global model, and Mi the local update.
During the training proceeds over communication rounds, the
server initializes the global model at t = 0. At each round t,
clients update their models using local data:
Mti = Mt−1 − η∇L(Mt−1 , Di )

(1)

The updates are sent to the server and aggregated to produce
the next global model:
N

Mt+1 =

1 X t
M
N i=1 i

(2)

The updated model is then redistributed to clients for the
next round of training.
B. Projection Pursuit Analysis and Kurtosis
Projection Pursuit Analysis (PPA) is a multivariate
technique that identifies informative projections of highdimensional data by maximizing a projection index [17].
Unlike Principal Component Analysis (PCA), which focuses
on variance, PPA detects non-Gaussian structures that often
correspond to anomalies or outliers. Formally, PPA searches
for a projection vector w that maximizes the projection index:
w∗ = arg max I(wT X)
w

(3)

In our context, the server applies PPA to the collection
of client updates in each round. Malicious updates typically
introduce abnormal patterns in the high-dimensional parameter
space, which PPA can highlight. The projection index used in
our work is the kurtosis score, defined as the standardized
fourth central moment of a distribution:
kurtosis =

E[(X − µ)4 ]
σ4

(4)

A high kurtosis values indicate heavy tails or outliers in
the projected distribution, allowing the detection of anomalous
client updates. This property makes kurtosis-based PPA particularly effective for identifying stealthy backdoor behaviors
embedded in model updates.
To illustrate this property, we conducted an experiment on
the MNIST dataset with 30 clients, where 10 clients used
poisoned data. The backdoor attack modified the first row of
pixels in images of class 0 and changed the label to 9. After
30 training rounds, PPA successfully separated malicious and
benign updates, whereas PCA did not produce clear clustering
(Fig. 1). These results demonstrate the effectiveness of PPA
for detecting anomalous model updates in federated learning.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 00, NO. 0, SEPTEMBER 0000

4

B. Attack Execution Strategies

(a) PPA score plot; each point

(b) PCA score plot; each point

represents a local model

represents a local model

Fig. 1. Comparison of model clustering using PPA vs. PCA. PPA shows
clearer separation between benign (black) and backdoored (blue) models.

IV. P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
In this section, we provide the formal definitions of different
backdoor attack models considered in our work and the
methods used to inject these attacks into federated learning
systems.
A. Backdoor Attack Models
Backdoor attacks aim to embed malicious behaviors into the
global model without significantly affecting its performance.
These attacks are particularly insidious because they can
remain undetected during the training process and only get
activated under specific conditions. When a certain trigger is
present, the model will behave differently from its expected
behavior. We can differentiate between three types of backdoor
attacks:
1) One-to-One Attack: An attack with a single trigger τ
modifies the local dataset Di such that:
Di′ = {(xj + τ, yja ) : (xj , yj ) ∈ Di }

(5)

This ensures that when the trigger τ is present, the input xj +τ
is misclassified as yja . This type of attack is straightforward but
effective, causing the model to produce incorrect predictions
for inputs containing the specific trigger.
2) One-to-N Attack: An attack with varying trigger intensities τk targets multiple behaviors yja :
Di′ = {(xj + τk , yja ) : (xj , yj ) ∈ Di , k = 1, . . . , K}

(6)

In this scenario, different intensities of the trigger τk cause
different misclassifications, making detection more challenging. The model may behave correctly under normal conditions
but produce erroneous outputs for inputs with varying degrees
of the trigger, complicating the identification of malicious
behavior.
3) N-to-One Attack: An attack requires all N backdoors τk
to be present simultaneously to trigger the attack:
Di′ = {(xj +

N
X

τk , yja ) : (xj , yj ) ∈ Di }

This section describes how these attacks can be performed.
One approach involves multiple rounds, where clients repeatedly send backdoored updates to the server. Another method is
model replacement, where clients wait until the model is near
convergence and then replace it to introduce the backdoor.
1) Multiple Rounds with Backdoored Updates: In this approach, the attack occurs over several communication rounds
t = 1, 2, . . . , T (where T is the total number of rounds). Each
client i trains its local model on dataset Di and computes
local updates. Malicious clients instead use a modified dataset
Di′ containing backdoors using one of the methods defined
in Equation (5), (6), or (7). Clients send their updates to
the server, which aggregates them to form the new global
model using Equation (2). Malicious clients continue submitting backdoored updates over several rounds, gradually
embedding the backdoor into the global model. This attack
can be performed by a single malicious client or collaboratively by multiple clients. Collaborative attacks are more
effective, as distributing poisoned updates reduces detection
risk. In contrast, a single client must inject more poisoned
data to influence the global model, making detection easier.
Additionally, when only one client attacks, the backdoor effect
may gradually vanish due to catastrophic forgetting across
rounds [18]. This scenario is realistic because it does not
require high-privilege access or control over the federated
learning process [19].
2) Model Replacement: In this approach, the attack occurs
when the global model is near convergence. Each client i trains
its local model on dataset Di , while malicious clients prepare
a significantly altered model using a modified dataset Di′ with
one of the methods defined in Equation (5), (6), or (7). At
a strategic round T ′ ≈ T , malicious clients submit altered
models containing the backdoor:
(T ′ )

Mi

= arg max L(M; Di′ ) + R(M)
M

(8)

The server then aggregates the updates to form the new
global model:
N

′

M(T +1) =

1 X (T ′ )
M
N i=1 i

(9)

Due to the large modifications introduced by malicious
clients, the global model may contain the backdoor. Although
model replacement attacks can be highly effective, they are
less realistic in practical federated learning systems [20].
Successfully replacing the global model without detection typically requires high-privilege access and precise control over
the aggregation process, which is rarely available to adversarial
clients. Therefore, this scenario assumes a stronger threat
model and is harder to implement in real-world deployments.

(7)

k=1

This type of attack is particularly stealthy because individual
triggers τk do not cause misclassifications on their own. Only
when all triggers are present together does the attack activate,
making it difficult to detect through traditional methods.

V. S YSTEM A RCHITECTURE
In this section, we present the overall system architecture
designed to mitigate backdoor attacks in federated learning.
The architecture includes Projection Pursuit Analysis (PPA)
for mitigating anomalous model update effects from malicious

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 00, NO. 0, SEPTEMBER 0000

clients, a reputation system to evaluate client behavior based
on historical data, including action taken as well as gradient
variation.
Algorithm 1 Multivariate Kurtosis Projection Pursuit (MKPP)
Require: Data matrix X, dimension p, number of guesses guess, search
type M axM in, algorithm type StSh
Ensure: Projection scores S, projection vectors V , kurtosis values kurtObj
1: Mean-center the data: X ← X − mean(X)
2: Perform SVD: (U, Z, V ) ← SVD(X)
3: Dimensionality reduction: X ← U Z
4: Initialize maxcount ← 1000, kurtObj ← 0
5: for k = 1 to guess do
6:
Initialize random projection V
7:
count ← 0, converged ← f alse
8:
while not converged and count < maxcount do
9:
A ← V T X T XV
10:
Update V using (A, M axM in, StSh)
11:
Normalize V using SVD
12:
if change in V < threshold then
13:
converged ← true
14:
end if
15:
count ← count + 1
16:
end while
17:
kurtObj[k] ← kurtosis(XV )
18: end for
19: Select best projection vector V
20: Compute scores S ← XV
21: return S, V , kurtObj

A. PPA-based Detection
The algorithm 1 aims to find optimal projection vectors
V from a data matrix X by maximizing or minimizing
the kurtosis score. The process begins by mean-centering
the data matrix X (line 1) and performing Singular Value
Decomposition (SVD) to reduce its dimensionality (lines 23). The algorithm then iterates over a set number of initial
guesses for the projection vectors V (line 5). In each iteration,
it initializes V randomly (line 6) and sets the count and
convergence flag (line 7). The algorithm updates V using a
quasi-power method (lines 9-10), normalizes V using SVD
(line 11), and checks for convergence based on changes in V
(lines 12-14). The iteration stops if convergence is achieved
or the maximum iteration count is reached (line 18). Once
all guesses are evaluated, the algorithm computes the kurtosis
for each projection (line 17) and selects the best V based on
the computed kurtosis values (line 19). Finally, it calculates
the scores S using this optimal projection vector (line 20).
The algorithm returns the scores, the optimal projection vector,
and the kurtosis values for each guess (line 21). The resulting
projection scores highlight extreme non-Gaussian deviations,
which often correspond to malicious updates. The computational complexity of the MKPP algorithm can be approximated
as O(|guess| × maxcount × n × p2 ), where n is the number of
samples and p is the dimensionality of the projection space.
The kurtosis-based PPA aims to identify extreme nonGaussian deviations that may indicate malicious behavior,
rather than capturing normal variance from benign data heterogeneity. To avoid misclassifying clients with legitimate
data distributions, PPA is combined with a dynamic reputation system that tracks each client’s historical behavior
and gradient consistency across training rounds. This duallayer assessment ensures that clients with stable behavior are

5

not unfairly penalized. Additionally, we introduce a reward
and penalty mechanism that adjusts reputation scores based
on behavioral patterns rather than statistical outliers alone,
encouraging participation and fairness while strengthening the
robustness of the detection strategy.
B. Reputation System
The reputation mechanism evaluates each client based on
historical behavior and gradient consistency. A probationary
phase allows the server to establish baseline behavior before
applying reputation adjustments.
The reputation score for client i at round t is:
Ri (t) = αHi (t) + βGi (t)

(10)

where Hi (t) represents historical behavior, Gi (t) captures
gradient variation and α,β are weights such that α + β = 1.
The historical behavior score can be derived as follows :
correct actions of client i
(11)
total actions
The gradient variation score tracks update stability over the
last n rounds:
Hi (t) =

Gi (t) =

t
1 X
(g j − gi )2
n j=t−n+1 i

(12)

Client influence is then dynamically adjusted using reward
and penalty updates:
Rinew = Riold + γRiold

(13)

Rinew = Riold − δRiold

(14)

Where γ is the adjustment factor for rewarding and δ is the
adjustment factor for penalizing.
This mechanism gradually reduces the influence of suspicious clients while allowing recovery for honest participants.
By combining PPA anomaly detection with reputation tracking, the system identifies persistent malicious behaviors rather
than incidental irregularities.
VI. M INIMAX G AME
In this section, we present the minimax security game,
where the server aims to minimize the impact of attacks by
reducing the influence of weights of suspicious clients while
the attack leader seeks to maximize this minimization.
A. Game Model
MiniMax is a game theoretical model in which one player’s
gain represents the other player’s exact loss. We can model
the interaction between a federated server (minimizer) and
malicious clients (maximizers) as a MiniMax game in federated learning, where malicious clients aim to maximize their
utility by injecting backdoor triggers into their local models
to manipulate the global model’s predictions. In contrast,
the federated server aims to minimize the impact of these

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 00, NO. 0, SEPTEMBER 0000

6

Adversary (Attack Leader) –
Maximizer

Attack Optimization
Eq. 29

Poisoned Updates (M′i)

M′2

.....

Step 1:

M1

Step 2 : Model Transmission

Inputs:
Reputation (Rᵢ),
Sensitivity (λ),
Baseline (θ)

Federated Server (Defender) – Minimizer

Mi
Mi
M′i

Step 3: Detection &
Assessment (PPA)

Reward

and DBSCAN

Penalty

Increase
Reputation (Rᵢ)
Decrease
Reputation (Rᵢ)

Step 6: Reputation
Update

Step 4:

Weight Calculation
Eq. 17

Reputation
History

Step 5:

Weighted Aggregation
Eq. 18

Global Model
Update M⁽ᵗ⁺¹⁾

Fig. 2. Architectural workflow of the proposed Minimax game.

malicious clients to ensure the integrity and accuracy of the
global model. The interaction is represented between two
players:
Server (minimizer): aims to preserve the integrity of
the global model by choosing the defense sensitivity
parameter λ ∈ [λmin , λmax ] ⊂ R+ , which controls the
aggressiveness of the PPA penalty on suspicious updates.
A larger λ penalises high-ρi clients more sharply but risks
false positives on honest clients.
• Adversary (maximizer): attempts to inject backdoor
triggers through poisoned local updates by selecting the
poisoning ratio ρi ∈ [0, 1] for each compromised client
i ∈ I ′ , given the server’s chosen λ.

•

This formulation allows the analysis of worst-case attack
scenarios and enables the design of defensive aggregation
strategies based on anomaly detection and reputation mechanisms.
B. Player Strategies
1) Adversarial Strategy: Malicious clients aim to inject
backdoor triggers into the federated training process using
the poisoning mechanisms defined in Section IV-A. Let Di
denote the benign dataset of client i. The attacker constructs
a poisoned dataset Di′ by injecting trigger patterns τ into a
subset of samples. The poisoning ratio ρi ∈ [0, 1] represents
the fraction of poisoned samples:
Di′ (ρi ) = Diclean ∪ Dipoisoned

(15)

wi (ρi , λ) =

Ri + θ − λρi
N
X

Rj + θ − λρj

(16)

where Mbd (τ ) represents the gradient direction induced by
poisoned samples.

(17)

j=1

Remark 1 (Approximation and validity). The linear model
si (ρi , λ) = θ − λρi is motivated by Eq. (16), where the poisoned update deviates from the benign update proportionally
to ρi . Since wi depends on all ρj via the denominator,
we
P
approximate it by a normalising constant C = j (Rj + θ),
yielding the separable surrogate J˜ used throughout Section VID; this preserves the monotonic incentive structure of the original game. Non-negativity of wi is guaranteed at equilibrium
since λρ∗i = (Ri + θ)/2 < Ri + θ.
The global model update is then:
N

Mt+1 =

1 X
wi (ρi , λ) Mti
N i=1

(18)

The server determines λ by anticipating the adversary’s best
response, as formalized in Section VI-D. The server uses
Projection Pursuit Analysis to compute anomaly scores across
client updates as follows:
S = PPA(M)

where |Dipoisoned | = ρi |Di |.
The resulting model update becomes
M′i = (1 − ρi )Mi + ρi Mbd (τ )

2) Server Strategy: The federated server mitigates malicious influence by choosing the defense sensitivity λ and
then assigning adaptive aggregation weights based on reputation scores and PPA anomaly scores. Substituting the PPA
similarity score si (ρi , λ) = θ − λρi into Equation (17),
the aggregation weight is therefore a function of both the
adversary’s poisoning ratio and the server’s chosen λ:

(19)

To further detect abnormal behaviors, the server applies
Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise
(DBSCAN) clustering to identify suspicious groups of clients.
DBSCAN is suitable for this task because of its ability to
detect clusters of arbitrary shape and its robustness to noise,
which allows it to isolate anomalous updates that deviate

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 00, NO. 0, SEPTEMBER 0000

7

significantly from the majority. Once DBSCAN identifies
clusters, Clients identified as anomalous are penalized through
reduced reputation scores, while benign clients receive rewards
according to Equations (13) and (14).
3) Utility Functions: The utility functions are derived from
the joint weight formula in Equation (17). Because the game
is zero-sum, it suffices to define the joint objective J(λ, ρ),
with U (F ) = −J and U (A) = J. Following the standard
approximation of replacing Φ(ρi , τ ) with ρi (motivated by the
linear poisoning structure in Remark 1), the joint objective is:
X
J(λ, ρ) =
wi (ρi , λ) · ρi
(20)
i∈I ′

D. Equilibrium Analysis and Solution
We adopt a simultaneous-move Nash formulation. The
adversary maximizes J˜A (ρi ) = wi (ρi , λ) · ρi for each i ∈ I ′ ,
treating λ as fixed; the server analogously chooses λ∗ as its
best response to ρ∗ (λ). Substituting si (ρi , λ) = θ − λρi into
the weight formula and approximating the denominator by C
(Remark 1) yields the surrogate per-client objective:
i
1h
(27)
(Ri + θ)ρi − λρ2i
J˜A (ρi ) ≈
C
This quadratic is strictly concave in ρi for any λ > 0. The unconstrained first-order condition gives the interior maximizer:
Ri + θ
(28)
2λ
Since the constraint ρi ∈ [0, 1] is binding whenever ρ̂i (λ) > 1,
the constrained best response is:


Ri + θ
∗
, 1
(29)
ρi (λ) = min
2λ
ρ̂i (λ) =

Server’s utility:
U (F ) = −J(λ, ρ)

(21)

The server minimizes J by choosing λ ∈ [λmin , λmax ]: a
larger λ reduces wi (ρi , λ) for high-ρi clients more aggressively, suppressing their weighted contribution to the objective.
Adversary’s utility:
U (A) = J(λ, ρ)

(22)

The adversary controls the poisoning ratio vector ρ =
{ρi }i∈I ′ , subject to ρi ∈ [0, 1], introducing a trade-off as:
1) Efficacy: Increasing ρi strengthens the backdoor objective.
2) Detectability: Larger ρi increases deviation from benign
updates via si (ρi , λ) = θ − λρi , reducing wi (ρi , λ)
and penalizing the reputation score Ri , which drives wi
toward zero.
C. Game Formulation
The strategic interaction is defined
⟨{Server, Adversary}, Λ, P, J, −J⟩, where:

as

G

=

Server strategy space: Λ = [λmin , λmax ] ⊂ R+ , a
compact interval. The server chooses λ ∈ Λ to minimize
the worst-case adversarial impact.
|I ′ |
• Adversary strategy space: P = [0, 1]
. The adversary
chooses ρ = {ρi }i∈I ′ to maximize J.

•

The interaction is formulated as the following minimax
program:
X
min max J(λ, ρ) = min max
wi (ρi , λ) · ρi
(23)
λ∈Λ ρ∈P

λ∈Λ ρ∈P

i∈I ′

subject to:
0 ≤ ρi ≤ 1,
N
X

∀i ∈ I ′

Note that ρ∗i = 1 whenever λ < (Ri +θ)/2, so a well-designed
server must satisfy the criterion:
Rmax + θ
(30)
2
where Rmax = supt,i Ri (t). To keep Rmax finite, the reward
update (Equation 13) is augmented with a cap:

Rinew = min Riold + γRiold , Rmax
(31)
λ∗ ≥

Setting Rmax = 1 with θ ≤ 1 keeps λ∗ ≤ 1, interpretable as
full detection certainty at maximum poisoning.
2) Server’s Optimal Strategy: Substituting ρ∗i (λ) from
Equation (29) into Equation (20), the server solves:
X

λ∗ = arg min
wi ρ∗i (λ), λ · ρ∗i (λ)
(32)
λ∈Λ

i∈I ′

In the interior regime, this objective is strictly decreasing in
λ (increasing λ simultaneously shrinks each ρ∗i and reduces
wi ), so the minimum is attained at the boundary:
λ∗ = λmax

(33)

subject to criterion (30); in practice λmax is tuned to balance
detection power against false positives on honest clients, and
is set to λmax = 1.0 in our experiments.
3) Existence and Uniqueness of the Saddle Point:
Theorem 1 (Existence of a Nash Saddle-Point Equilibrium).
The surrogate game G̃ (see Remark 1) admits at least one Nash
saddle-point equilibrium (λ∗ , ρ∗ ), constituting an approximate
equilibrium of the original game G.

(24)

wk (ρk , λ) = 1

(25)

λmin ≤ λ ≤ λmax

(26)

k=1

where wi (ρi , λ) is defined in Equation (17). Both strategy
spaces are compact and convex, satisfying the prerequisites
for the equilibrium analysis in Section VI-D.

Proof. We verify the conditions of Sion’s minimax theo˜ ρ) (Remark 1).
rem [21]. Let f (λ, ρ) = J(λ,
(i) Compact, convex strategy spaces. Λ = [λmin , λmax ]
′
is a compact convex subset of R. P = [0, 1]|I | is a compact
′
convex subset of R|I | .
(ii) Quasi-convexity in λ. In the interior regime, each term
wi (ρ∗i , λ) · ρ∗i (λ) ∝ (Ri + θ)2 /λ is strictly convex in λ > 0.
In the boundary regime (ρ∗i = 1), wi (1, λ) = (Ri + θ − λ)/C ′

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 00, NO. 0, SEPTEMBER 0000

is affine (hence convex) in λ. Thus J˜ is quasi-convex on all
of Λ.
(iii) Quasi-concavity in ρ (adversary’s variable). For fixed
λ, Equation (27) shows JA (ρi ) is strictly concave (hence
quasi-concave) in each ρi . Since the objectives are separable
across clients i ∈ I ′ , J is quasi-concave in ρ jointly.
(iv) Continuity. wi (ρi , λ) is continuous in both arguments
on the interior of Λ × P (it is a rational function with positive
denominator). Thus J is jointly continuous.
By Sion’s minimax theorem, minλ maxρ J
=
maxρ minλ J, and there exists a saddle point (λ∗ , ρ∗ )
satisfying:
J(λ∗ , ρ) ≤ J(λ∗ , ρ∗ ) ≤ J(λ, ρ∗ )

∀ λ ∈ Λ, ρ ∈ P (34)

Interpretation. At equilibrium, λ∗ = λmax forces each
adversary’s best response to ρ∗i = (Ri + θ)/2λmax < 1,
deterring full poisoning and confirming the low attack success
rates observed in Figure 4 even at 30% malicious participation.
VII. F ED BBA: F EDERATED BACKDOOR AND B EHAVIOR
A NALYSIS
In this section, we present the operational flow of our
proposed federated learning defense framework, FedBBA (Federated Backdoor and Behavior Analysis).
FedBBA enhances the robustness of federated learning by
identifying and mitigating backdoor attacks without accessing
raw client data, thereby preserving data privacy. Instead, it
analyzes only model updates using Projection Pursuit Analysis
(PPA) and a dynamic reputation scoring system.
Algorithm 2 Round-Based Execution of the FedBBA Framework
1: Initialize global model M0 , reputation scores Ri
2: for each federated learning round r in 1 to T do
3:
for each client i in 1 to N do
4:
Train local model Mi on client’s data
5:
Send local model Mi to server
6:
end for
7:
Calculate PPA score si = PPA(Mi )
8:
Cluster PPA scores using DBSCAN to determine
classes
9:
for each client i in classes do
10:
Compute normalized weights using Equation (17)
11:
if classi == 0 then
12:
Update reputation score Ri negatively using Equation (14)
13:
else
14:
Update reputation score Ri positively using Equation (13)
15:
end if
16:
end for
17:
Update global model using Equation (18)
18:
Calculate server’s payoff using Equation (21)
19:
Calculate attacker’s payoff using Equation (22)
20: end for

8

The detailed step-by-step procedure is formalized in Algorithm 2. At the start of training (t = 0), the server initializes
the global model M and assigns an initial reputation score
Ri for each client. These scores are based on both historical
behavior and gradient variation, as defined in Equation (11)
(Line 1). During each federated learning round r from 1 to
T , selected clients train local models Mi on their private
data and transmit them back to the server (Lines 2–5). The
server then computes PPA scores si to quantify the level of
anomalous behavior in each update (Line 7), followed by
clustering using DBSCAN to identify suspicious clients (Line
8). Based on these clusters, client reputation scores Ri are
updated: suspicious clients are penalized (Lines 11–12) using
Equation (14), while benign clients are rewarded (Lines 13–
14) via Equation (13). Normalized aggregation weights are
computed using both reputation and PPA scores (Line 10),
and the global model is updated accordingly using Equation (18) (Line 16). Finally, the server and attacker payoffs
are calculated using the MiniMax game-based utility functions
(Equations 21 and 22, Lines 18–19). This iterative process
allows FedBBA to dynamically detect and suppress malicious
behaviors across rounds.
Figure 2 illustrates the strategic execution of the proposed
Minimax game framework. The interaction starts with the
Attack Leader solving the maximization problem to derive the
constrained optimal poisoning ratio ρ∗i = min{(Ri +θ)/2λ, 1}
via Equation (29), which balances attack impact with detectability given the server’s chosen defense sensitivity λ
(Step 1). Following this, both malicious and benign clients
perform local training and transmit their model updates Mi to
the server (Step 2). Upon receiving the updates, the Federated
Server initiates the defense phase by calculating Projection
Pursuit Analysis (PPA) scores and utilizing DBSCAN to
cluster the updates and identify anomalies (Step 3). Based on
these clusters, the server computes the aggregation weights
wi (ρi , λ∗ ) for all clients using Equation (17), suppressing
the influence of high-poisoning clients consistent with the
equilibrium defense sensitivity λ∗ (Step 4). The server then
aggregates the weighted local models to produce the global
model update M(t+1) via Equation (18) (Step 5). Finally, the
feedback loop is closed as the server updates the reputation
scores Ri penalizing identified malicious actors via Equation (14) and rewarding honest participants via Equation (13),
which reduces the adversary’s optimal poisoning ratio ρ∗i in
the subsequent round via Equation (29), as a lower Ri directly
decreases the equilibrium best response (Step 6).
VIII. S IMULATION & E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we present the experimental results demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach in minimizing the
effects of backdoor attacks while maintaining the accuracy of
the global model.
A. Context & Environment
We conduct our experiments using the GTSRB and BTSC
datasets, which contain 43 and 62 traffic sign classes respectively, to evaluate classification performance. The implemen-

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 00, NO. 0, SEPTEMBER 0000

tation relies on industry-standard libraries including Torch,
Torchvision, NumPy, and Pandas.
We employ a convolutional neural network (CNN) composed of convolutional layers for feature extraction and two
fully connected layers for classification. The poisoning ratio
ρi is dynamically determined by the adversary according to
the optimization formulation described in Section VI. For
the GTSRB dataset, we reduce it to 10 classes by selecting
those with the highest number of samples. Each client is
assigned 4 to 6 classes, with 250 to 350 samples per class.
For the BTSC dataset, each client receives between 20 and
40 classes, with 50 to 150 images per class. This class-based
partitioning results in a non-IID data distribution across clients,
simulating realistic federated settings where participants hold
heterogeneous local datasets. The federated learning setting
consists of a total of C = 300 clients, from which c = 40
clients are randomly selected in each training round. Among
the participating clients, up to 30% are malicious.
We use two primary metrics to evaluate our approach:
• Accuracy: the percentage of correctly classified images.
• Backdoor attack success rate: the percentage of triggered (backdoored) test samples misclassified by the
global model into the attacker’s predefined target label.
We compare our approach (FedBBA) with two state-of-theart methods and a baseline:
• Vanilla: standard federated learning with random client
selection, used as a baseline [1].
• RoPE: a state-of-the-art method that applies PCA for
backdoor detection [14].
• RDFL: a state-of-the-art approach using clustering and
noise clipping for robust aggregation [15].
For the clustering component of our approach, we use the
DBSCAN algorithm. The parameters are tuned through grid
search, with the neighborhood radius set to ε = 0.6 and the
minimum samples parameter set to 5. These values balance
cluster cohesion and noise filtering, ensuring stable clustering
results across the datasets.
B. Experimental Results
In this section, we present the results of our experiments in
terms of accuracy and backdoor attack success rate, providing
a detailed comparative analysis with baseline and state-of-theart approaches.
To evaluate the impact of the reputation score’s weighting
parameters, we performed a sensitivity analysis on the values
of α and β, which represent the contribution of historical
behavior and gradient-based anomaly signals, respectively. We
constrained α + β = 1 and varied each to assess the effect
on both clean-task accuracy and backdoor success rate. The
experiments were conducted on the GTSRB dataset with a
training duration of 100 federated learning rounds.
As illustrated in Table II, the balanced configuration α =
β = 0.5 provides a better trade-off between clean accuracy and
backdoor resilience. It achieves one of the highest accuracy
values 96.8%, while minimizing the backdoor success rate
to just 16%. In contrast, skewed configurations α = 0.9,
β = 0.1 result in a significantly higher backdoor success

9

TABLE II
I MPACT OF α AND β ON M ODEL ACCURACY AND BACKDOOR S UCCESS
R ATE USING GTSRB DATASET OVER 100 ROUNDS

α

β

Accuracy (%)

Backdoor Success Rate (%)

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

96.6
95.4
96.9
96.2
96.8
96.2
95.6
95.5
96.1

25.0
28.0
21.0
33.0
16.0
22.0
41.0
21.0
45.0

rate up to 45%, indicating reduced robustness. This empirical
evidence justifies our choice of equal weights in the reputation
calculation. However, we recognize that optimal values may
vary across applications, and tuning may be warranted in
future work depending on domain-specific factors and threat
severity.
1) One-to-One Attacks: Figure 3(a) illustrates the performance of our FedBBA approach in mitigating backdoor
attacks while maintaining high normal task accuracy using the
GTSRB dataset. Initially, all methods exhibit nearly similar
accuracy levels; however, as training progresses, FedBBA’s
accuracy significantly surpasses that of the other approaches.
By the 20th round, FedBBA achieves an accuracy exceeding 60%, which is markedly higher than RDFL and RoPE,
whose accuracy remains below 15%. This trend continues with
FedBBA reaching an accuracy of approximately 96.8% by the
100th round, compared to 93.4% for RDFL, 95.5% for Vanilla,
and 91.5% for RoPE. While the improvement in clean-task accuracy over baseline methods may appear modest ∼3.4–11%,
it is statistically meaningful and, more importantly, shows that
the mitigation happened without hindering the performance
on normal tasks. This is especially important in the context
of backdoor attacks, which are stealthy and preserve normal
task accuracy to evade detection. Many existing defenses
apply techniques such as excluding clients or pruning updates,
leading to significant degradation in normal task performance.
In contrast, FedBBA achieves a strong balance by preserving
high accuracy on the normal task while substantially reducing
the backdoor success rate to the lowest ∼1–10%. These results
underscore FedBBA’s robust capability in maintaining model
integrity and performance, effectively addressing backdoor
attacks more efficiently than the other methods evaluated.
Figure 4(a) presents the backdoor attack success rate results,
highlighting the effectiveness of the FedBBA technique using
the GTSRB dataset. The Vanilla baseline confirms the efficacy
of the attack, rapidly reaching and maintaining a 100% success
rate, thereby establishing the severity of the threat in an unprotected setting. In sharp contrast, FedBBA effectively suppresses
the backdoor, maintaining a complete 0% attack success rate
for the first 18 rounds. While other defense methods like
RDFL and RoPE exhibit significant instability, with RoPE
peaking at 85.2% and RDFL fluctuating considerably, FedBBA
consistently keeps the attack impact minimal. By the 100th

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 00, NO. 0, SEPTEMBER 0000

(a) GTSRB (1 1) Accuracy

100

(b) BTSC (1 1) Accuracy

100
80

80

60

60

60

40

40

40

20

20

20

0

20

100

40

60

(d) BTSC (1 N) Accuracy

80

100

0

0

100

20

40

60

80

(e) GTSRB (N 1) Accuracy

100

0

80

80

60

60

60

40

40

40

20

20

20

0

20

40

60

80

100

0

0

20

40

60

0

20

0

20

100

80

0

(c) GTSRB (1 N) Accuracy

100

80

0

Accuracy (%)

10

80

100

0

40

60

80

100

40

60

80

100

(f) BTSC (N 1) Accuracy

Communication Rounds
Vanilla

FedBBA

RoPE

RDFL

Fig. 3. Normal task accuracy comparison of RDFL, Vanilla, FedBBA, and RoPE across datasets and attack settings over 100 communication rounds.

(a) GTSRB (1 1) Attack

Backdoor Success Rate (%)

100

(b) BTSC (1 1) Attack

100

80

80

80

60

60

60

40

40

40

20

20

20

0

0

20

100

40

60

(d) BTSC (1 N) Attack

80

100

0

0

20

100

40

60

(e) GTSRB (N 1) Attack

80

100

0

80

80

60

60

60

40

40

40

20

20

20

0

0

20

40

60

80

100

0

20

40

60

0

20

0

20

100

80

0

(c) GTSRB (1 N) Attack

100

80

100

0

40

60

80

100

40

60

80

100

(f) BTSC (N 1) Attack

Communication Rounds
Vanilla

FedBBA

RoPE

RDFL

Fig. 4. Backdoor success rate comparison of RDFL, Vanilla, FedBBA, and RoPE across datasets and attack scenarios over 100 communication rounds.

round, FedBBA restricts the attack success rate to just 10.8%,
significantly outperforming RDFL (42.4%) and RoPE (55.8%).
Figure 3(b) shows the performance of FedBBA in maintaining high normal task accuracy compared to RDFL, Vanilla,
and RoPE using the BTSC dataset. Initially, all methods
exhibit similar accuracy levels, with FedBBA starting at 3.4%
while RDFL, Vanilla, and RoPE start at 6.2%, 5.3%, and
3.5%, respectively. As training progresses, FedBBA’s accuracy
significantly surpasses that of the other approaches in the early
stages. By the 10th round, FedBBA achieves an accuracy of
57.1%, markedly higher than RDFL (6.4%), Vanilla (5.9%),
and RoPE (47.6%). By the 20th round, FedBBA achieves an

accuracy of 83.0%, while RDFL, Vanilla, and RoPE reach
16.7%, 79.6%, and 73.6%, respectively. This trend stabilizes
with FedBBA reaching an accuracy of approximately 94.6%
by the 100th round. In comparison, RDFL, Vanilla, and RoPE
exhibit accuracies of 94.2%, 95.9%, and 94.8%, respectively.
Figure 4(b) highlights the effectiveness of the FedBBA
approach in mitigating backdoor attacks compared to RDFL,
Vanilla, and RoPE using the BTSC dataset. Initially, no
approach exhibits vulnerability. This delay can be attributed
to the complexity and breadth of the BTSC dataset, which necessitates a higher number of training rounds for the backdoor
mechanism to establish persistence. This behavior is clearly

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 00, NO. 0, SEPTEMBER 0000

observed in the Vanilla approach, where, even in the absence
of any defense mechanism, the attack required more than 20
rounds to achieve a 100% success rate.
As training progresses beyond this initial phase, FedBBA
demonstrates remarkable resilience compared to the baselines.
For example, at round 38, FedBBA and RDFL still show
an attack success rate of 0%, whereas Vanilla has already
stabilized at 100% and RoPE has risen to approximately 7.8%.
By round 100, FedBBA successfully suppresses the attack
success rate to just 1.1%, significantly lower than RDFL
(53.5%), RoPE (56.7%), and Vanilla (100%). This consistent
suppression underscores FedBBA’s superior robustness in mitigating backdoor attacks throughout the training process.
2) One-to-N Attacks: Figure 3(c) presents the main task
accuracy of the global model throughout the training process.
Despite the presence of the attack, FedBBA demonstrates a
high level of utility preservation, achieving a final accuracy of
95.38% by round 100. This performance is comparable to, and
slightly exceeds, the Vanilla baseline, which reaches 94.69%.
In contrast, the other defense mechanisms show a notable
degradation in model utility, with RDFL and RoPE achieving
lower final accuracies of 91.78% and 90.81%, respectively.
This indicates that FedBBA successfully defends against the
attack without compromising the model’s ability to learn the
primary task.
Figure 4(c) highlights the effectiveness of the approaches
in mitigating the backdoor attack. The Vanilla model is compromised almost immediately, with the attack success rate
jumping to 40% at round 1 and reaching total saturation of
100% as early as round 7, where it remains for the duration
of training. RoPE and RDFL also fail to prevent the attack,
ending with high attack success rates of 76.4% and 67%,
respectively. Conversely, FedBBA exhibits superior robustness,
maintaining the attack success rate near zero for most of the
training process. By round 100, FedBBA suppresses the attack
success rate to just 5.84%, significantly outperforming all other
methods and effectively neutralizing the backdoor threat.
Figure 3(d) presents the main task accuracy of the global
model throughout the training process. FedBBA demonstrates
exceptional utility preservation, achieving a final accuracy of
98.06% by round 100. This performance is effectively on par
with the Vanilla baseline, which reaches 98.30%, indicating
that the defense mechanism does not hinder the model’s ability
to learn the complex features of the BTSC dataset. In contrast,
the other defense mechanisms suffer from significant utility
loss, with RDFL and RoPE dropping to final accuracies of
89.79% and 87.98%, respectively.
Figure 4(d) highlights the effectiveness of the approaches in
mitigating the backdoor attack. The Vanilla model exhibits extreme vulnerability, with the attack success rate surging rapidly
to 99.6% by round 9 and reaching total saturation (100%)
by round 10, where it remains fixed. RoPE and RDFL also
fail to provide adequate protection, ending the training with
high attack success rates of 49.02% and 56.10%, respectively.
Conversely, FedBBA shows superior resilience. Despite the aggressive nature of the attack, FedBBA consistently suppresses
the backdoor, maintaining a low attack success rate throughout
the session and concluding at just 4.88% by round 100.

11

This sharp contrast with the baselines underscores FedBBA’s
capability to neutralize One-to-N backdoor injections on the
BTSC dataset.
3) N-to-One Attacks: Figure 3(e) evaluates the performance
of various defense mechanisms under a multiple-to-one backdoor attack using the GTSRB dataset. Initially, at round 1,
all defenses exhibit similar performance with accuracy rates
around 7.41% for RDFL and Vanilla, 11.57% for FedBBA,
and 10.19% for RoPE. As training progresses, FedBBA consistently outperforms or matches the other methods. By round
20, FedBBA’s accuracy escalates to 71.74%, higher than RDFL
(68.66%), Vanilla (64.55%), and significantly outperforming
RoPE (10.56%). By round 100, FedBBA reaches a peak
accuracy of 96.14%, effectively matching or slightly exceeding RDFL (96.06%) and Vanilla (96.02%), while remaining
superior to RoPE (93.97%).
Figure 4(e) underscores the superior efficacy of the FedBBA
approach in comparison to RDFL and RoPE in reducing the
backdoor success rate under the multi-trigger setting using
the GTSRB dataset. Initially, Vanilla exhibits immediate vulnerability, starting at 50.2% in round 0, while RDFL spikes
to 100% by round 1. In contrast, FedBBA starts with an
attack success rate of 0% and, despite the aggressive attack
environment, keeps the rate significantly lower than the other
methods throughout the session. For example, at round 40,
FedBBA shows an attack success rate of just 4.2%, whereas
Vanilla has already saturated at 100%, RDFL is at 54.6%,
and RoPE is at 34.4%. By round 100, FedBBA suppresses the
attack success rate to 11.0%, which is significantly lower than
RDFL (75.6%), RoPE (59.8%), and Vanilla (100%).
Figure 3(f) illustrates the performance of various defense
mechanisms in the normal task accuracy under a multipleto-one backdoor attack scenario using the BTSC dataset.
Initially, all methods exhibit comparable accuracy levels below
7%. By round 10, Vanilla takes an early lead with 66.5%,
while FedBBA achieves 47.9%, RDFL 8.1%, and RoPE 8.5%.
However, FedBBA demonstrates steady and robust learning as
training progresses. By round 100, FedBBA reaches a peak
accuracy of 95.08%, effectively matching RDFL (95.16%)
and outperforming both Vanilla (94.44%) and RoPE (94.72%).
This confirms that FedBBA maintains high utility even under
complex attack scenarios.
Figure 4(f) highlights the effectiveness of FedBBA in mitigating backdoor attacks compared to RDFL and RoPE in
a multiple-to-one attack scenario using the BTSC dataset.
FedBBA demonstrates a significant improvement, consistently
achieving lower success rates. Specifically, FedBBA starts with
a success rate of 0% and, despite the attack’s persistence, keeps
the rate significantly low throughout the rounds. For instance,
by round 50, FedBBA suppresses the attack success rate to
5.3%, whereas Vanilla has already reached total saturation
(100%), and RDFL and RoPE have risen to 25.6% and 30.6%,
respectively. By round 100, FedBBA further limits the attack
success rate to 1.77%, significantly lower than RDFL (31.9%),
RoPE (23.8%), and Vanilla (100%).
In summary, the results illustrate that FedBBA consistently
outperforms RDFL and RoPE in maintaining high accuracy
and mitigating backdoor attacks. Across different attack sce-

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 00, NO. 0, SEPTEMBER 0000

narios and datasets, FedBBA proves to be a robust defense
mechanism, specifically in the N-to-One and One-to-N coordinated backdoor attack, which reflects the framework’s ability
to detect the pattern of the malicious data in the suspicious
models, effectively enhancing model integrity and performance while addressing the challenges posed by backdoor
attacks.
IX. C ONCLUSION
In this work, we proposed a novel and comprehensive
backdoor attack detection and mitigation scheme for federated
learning called FedBBA. Our framework uniquely integrates
Projection Pursuit Analysis (PPA), a robust reputation system,
and game-theoretic incentives to neutralize malicious clients.
Extensive simulations on the GTSRB and BTSC datasets
demonstrate that FedBBA significantly outperforms existing
state-of-the-art methods, specifically RDFL and RoPE, across
diverse attack scenarios, including One-to-N and N-to-One
attacks. Empirical results confirm that FedBBA effectively
suppresses backdoor attack success rates to between 1.1%
and 11%, whereas baseline defenses often failed to contain
the threat, yielding success rates as high as 76%. Crucially,
this robustness is achieved without hindering the global
model’s performance; FedBBA consistently maintained normal
task accuracy in the range of 95% to 98%. While FedBBA
demonstrates strong effectiveness, its evaluation is restricted
to image-based classification tasks. Future work will explore
generalizing the framework to diverse modalities, such as natural language processing and IoT sensor data. Additionally, we
plan to incorporate adaptive parameter learning to dynamically
tune the reputation weights (α and β), further enhancing the
framework’s scalability and responsiveness to evolving threat
landscapes.
R EFERENCES
[1] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas,
“Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized
data,” in Artificial intelligence and statistics. PMLR, 2017, pp. 1273–
1282.
[2] M. P. Uddin, Y. Xiang, M. Hasan, J. Bai, Y. Zhao, and L. Gao,
“A systematic literature review of robust federated learning: Issues,
solutions, and future research directions,” ACM Computing Surveys,
vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 1–62, 2025.
[3] D. Shenoy, R. Bhat, and K. Krishna Prakasha, “Exploring privacy
mechanisms and metrics in federated learning,” Artificial Intelligence
Review, vol. 58, no. 8, p. 223, 2025.
[4] C. Zhu, J. Zhang, X. Sun, B. Chen, and W. Meng, “Adfl: Defending
backdoor attacks in federated learning via adversarial distillation,”
Computers & Security, vol. 132, p. 103366, 2023.
[5] C. Wu, X. Yang, S. Zhu, and P. Mitra, “Mitigating backdoor attacks in
federated learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.01767, 2020.
[6] B. Xi, S. Li, J. Li, H. Liu, H. Liu, and H. Zhu, “Batfl: Backdoor detection
on federated learning in e-health,” in 2021 IEEE/ACM 29th International
Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQOS). IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–10.
[7] J. Jia, Z. Yuan, D. Sahabandu, L. Niu, A. Rajabi, B. Ramasubramanian,
B. Li, and R. Poovendran, “Fedgame: a game-theoretic defense against
backdoor attacks in federated learning,” Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, vol. 36, pp. 53 090–53 111, 2023.
[8] Z. Gu and Y. Yang, “Detecting malicious model updates from federated
learning on conditional variational autoencoder,” in 2021 IEEE international parallel and distributed processing symposium (IPDPS). IEEE,
2021, pp. 671–680.

12

[9] P. Quan, W.-H. Lee, M. Srivatsa, and M. Srivastava, “Enhancing robustness in federated learning by supervised anomaly detection,” in 2022
26th International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR). IEEE,
2022, pp. 996–1003.
[10] K. Otmani, R. El-Azouzi, and V. Labatut, “Fedsv: Byzantine-robust
federated learning via shapley value,” in ICC 2024-IEEE International
Conference on Communications. IEEE, 2024, pp. 4620–4625.
[11] J. Zhang, C. Zhu, X. Sun, C. Ge, B. Chen, W. Susilo, and S. Yu, “Flpurifier: Backdoor defense in federated learning via decoupled contrastive
training,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security,
vol. 19, pp. 4752–4766, 2024.
[12] H. Cai, J. Wang, L. Gao, and F. Li, “Flmaacbd: Defending against
backdoors in federated learning via model anomalous activation behavior
detection,” Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 289, p. 111511, 2024.
[13] O. A. Wahab and A. Avila, “A max-min security game for coordinated
backdoor attacks on federated learning,” in 2023 IEEE International
Conference on Big Data (BigData). IEEE, 2023, pp. 3566–3573.
[14] Y. Wang, D.-H. Zhai, and Y. Xia, “Rope: Defending against backdoor
attacks in federated learning systems,” Knowledge-Based Systems, vol.
293, p. 111660, 2024.
[15] Y. Wang, D.-H. Zhai, Y. He, and Y. Xia, “An adaptive robust defending algorithm against backdoor attacks in federated learning,” Future
Generation Computer Systems, vol. 143, pp. 118–131, 2023.
[16] Y. Wang, D.-H. Zhai, and Y. Xia, “Scfl: Mitigating backdoor attacks in
federated learning based on svd and clustering,” Computers & Security,
vol. 133, p. 103414, 2023.
[17] F. Bong, I. Ahmed, N. Ramakrishnan, K. N. Valenzuela-Valderas, P. D.
Wentzell, J. Barra, and T. K. Karakach, “Augmented kurtosis-based
projection pursuit: a novel, advanced machine learning approach for
multi-omics data analysis and integration,” Nucleic Acids Research,
vol. 53, no. 17, p. gkaf844, 2025.
[18] Z. Zhang, A. Panda, L. Song, Y. Yang, M. Mahoney, P. Mittal, R. Kannan, and J. Gonzalez, “Neurotoxin: Durable backdoors in federated
learning,” in International conference on machine learning. PMLR,
2022, pp. 26 429–26 446.
[19] Y. Dai and S. Li, “Chameleon: Adapting to peer images for planting
durable backdoors in federated learning,” in International Conference
on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2023, pp. 6712–6725.
[20] V. Shejwalkar, A. Houmansadr, P. Kairouz, and D. Ramage, “Back to the
drawing board: A critical evaluation of poisoning attacks on production
federated learning,” in 2022 IEEE symposium on security and privacy
(SP). IEEE, 2022, pp. 1354–1371.
[21] M. Sion, “On general minimax theorems,” Pacific Journal of Mathematics, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 171–176, 1958.
Osama Wehbi is a Ph.D. candidate in the Department of Computer and Software Engineering at Polytechnique Montreal, Canada. His primary research
areas include cybersecurity, federated learning, and game theory.
Sarhad Arisdakessian is a Ph.D. candidate in the Department of Computer
and Software Engineering at Polytechnique Montreal, Canada. His research
interests lie in federated learning and game theory.
Omar Abdel Wahab holds an assistant professor position with the Department of Computer and Software Engineering, Polytechnique Montreal,
Canada. His research activities focus on cybersecurity, Internet of Things,
and artificial intelligence.
Anderson R. Avila is a Ph.D. candidate at the Institut National de la
Recherche Scientifique (INRS), Canada. His research interests include speaker
and emotion recognition, pattern recognition, and multimodal signal processing for biometric applications.
Azzam Mourad is a Professor of Computer Science with Khalifa University,
UAE. His research interests include cloud computing, artificial intelligence,
and cybersecurity.
Hadi Otrok is a Professor and Chair of the Department of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science at Khalifa University, UAE. His research
interests include computer and network security, crowd sensing and sourcing,
ad hoc networks, and cloud security.

