JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

1

Secure-CHG: A Comprehensive Framework for
Robust and Fair Federated Learning via Hybrid
Defense and Contribution-Aware Trust

arXiv:2606.31066v1 [cs.CR] 30 Jun 2026

Guanming Che, Qiang Wang∗ , Jian Xu, Fucai Zhou

Abstract—Federated Learning (FL) is highly susceptible to
stealthy backdoor attacks, which aim to force a model into
predicting an attacker-chosen target class for inputs containing
a specific trigger. However, existing statistical defenses primarily
focus on the early stages of model convergence. In this paper, we
identify a fundamental vulnerability termed “Late-stage Failure.”
We demonstrate that as the global model converges, decaying
gradient norms render malicious and benign updates morphologically indistinguishable. This vanishing statistical variance effectively blinds traditional defenses, enabling adaptive adversaries to
remain dormant and subsequently hijack the training process. To
overcome these constraints, we propose Secure-CHG, a hybrid
framework that pivots the defense paradigm from superficial
morphological detection toward intrinsic semantic contribution
verification. Secure-CHG employs an adaptive defense pipeline:
a cascaded statistical filter stabilizes optimization during the
early oscillatory phase, while a novel CHG-Shapley mechanism
takes over during late-stage convergence. By leveraging sample hardness (i.e., local training loss) to project updates into
a composite Hardness-Gradient space, it effectively amplifies
adversarial semantic traces, enabling the isolation of stealthy
attackers even as gradient norms vanish. Furthermore, we
derive a closed-form solution for CHG-Shapley, facilitating lowcomplexity, retraining-free node valuation and trust-modulated
aggregation. Extensive evaluations on CIFAR-10, MedMNIST,
and NEU-SDDB demonstrate that Secure-CHG effectively mitigates Late-stage Failure. Specifically, it significantly suppresses
advanced backdoor attacks, reducing their attack success rate by
2.3× and 2.0× relative to the mainstream Krum and Trimmed
Mean baselines, respectively.
Index Terms—Federated Learning, Poisoning Attacks, Latestage Failure, Shapley Value, Contribution Evaluation, Robust
Aggregation.

I. I NTRODUCTION

F

EDERATED Learning (FL) has emerged as a promising
decentralized learning paradigm that enables multiple
clients to collaboratively train a global model without sharing
their raw local data [1], [2]. In a standard FL workflow, the
server broadcasts the current global model, clients perform
local training on their private datasets, and the server aggregates the uploaded updates to produce the global model
The authors are with the Software College, Northeastern
University, Shenyang 110013, China(e-mail: chegm@mails.neu.edu.cn;
wangqiang1@mail.neu.edu.cn;
xuj@mail.neu.edu.cn;
fczhou@mail.neu.edu.cn).
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (Grants 62202090, 62173101, and 62372069), the Natural Science
Foundation of Liaoning Province (Grant 2025-MS-046), and the Liaoning
Collaboration Innovation Center for CSLE(Grant XTCX2024-015).
∗ Corresponding author: Qiang Wang.

for the next round. This training pattern offers substantial
privacy advantages and has made FL attractive for sensitive
domains such as healthcare, finance, and industrial intelligence. However, the distributed and partially untrusted nature
of FL also exposes the training process to severe security
threats, especially poisoning and backdoor attacks [3], [4].
Malicious clients can upload manipulated updates to degrade
the global model or implant hidden triggers while appearing to
participate normally [5]. To defend against such threats, many
robust aggregation methods, such as Krum [6], Trimmed Mean
[7], and related statistical filters, attempt to identify abnormal
clients based on geometric or statistical properties of their
updates. Since malicious updates exhibit explicit deviations
in magnitude or direction, these defenses work well during
the initial training stages.
In this paper, we reveal a critical theoretical deficiency
in existing defense mechanisms that manifests as the model
approaches convergence, a phenomenon we define as Latestage Failure. As the global model gradually converges, the
magnitudes of updates from both benign and malicious clients
shrink toward zero and become increasingly similar. Consequently, the absolute distances and relative variances between
benign and malicious updates in the parameter space collapse.
As a result, distance-based and morphology-based defenses
lose their discriminative power. This creates a dangerous blind
spot in the late training stage, allowing attackers to inject
backdoors that bypass traditional checks without significantly
compromising main-task performance.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, we evaluate the ostensibly robust
MultiKrum mechanism under a targeted label-flipping attack
(e.g., misclassifying “Cat” as “Dog”) with a 20% malicious
client ratio. Our results demonstrate that MultiKrum’s defense
capability collapses abruptly after approximately 20 communication rounds. In the subsequent 30 rounds, the average Attack
Success Rate (ASR) surges to 41.97%, indicating that nearly
half of the adversarial updates successfully evade detection.
This precipitous decline in protection—a “defense blind spot”
during the terminal phase of training—confirms that Late-stage
Failure is not merely an implementation artifact of a single
algorithm, but rather a systematic mismatch between the optimization dynamics of model convergence and the statistical
assumptions underlying conventional anomaly detection.
In summary, the inherent Late-stage Failure exposes a
critical vulnerability in traditional defenses. As converging
gradient norms render malicious and benign updates morphologically indistinguishable, the system inadvertently conflates

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

80

2

FedAvg
MultiKrum

70

60

ASR

50

40

30

20

10

0
0

10

20

30

40

50

epoch

Fig. 1. Illustration of Late-stage Failure: Defense capability collapses as the
model converges.

stealthy adversaries with benign participants. To transcend
these vulnerabilities, we propose Secure-CHG, an intrinsically
robust and computationally efficient FL governance framework. Pioneering a full-lifecycle defense paradigm, SecureCHG adaptively toggles between two governance phases based
on the model’s convergence state:
• Early-stage defense: During the pre-convergence oscillatory period, a cascaded dual-filter (cosine similarity and
FL-Defender [8]) precisely identifies and eliminates statistically anomalous gradients, aggressively purifying the
initial training environment to stabilize the optimization
trajectory.
• Late-stage defense: To break the defensive deadlock
caused by diminishing parameter variance, we introduce
sample hardness (i.e., local training loss) as a semantic
evaluation metric. Because poisoning tasks inherently
conflict with primary optimization, malicious nodes exhibit persistently high hardness even as the global model
stabilizes. By coupling this hardness metric with parameter updates, Secure-CHG effectively magnifies adversarial traces and isolates stealthy attackers precisely
when statistical features fail. Crucially, it enables realtime, constant-complexity client valuation without external proxy datasets or costly model retraining.
Ultimately, an EMA-based long-term trust mechanism translates these real-time contributions into aggregation weights,
forging a secure, equitable, and sustainable FL ecosystem.
A. Our Contributions
The main contributions can be summarized as follows:
1) Identifying and Mitigating Late-stage Failure in FL
Defenses: We expose the theoretical blind spot termed
“Late-stage Failure” where morphological convergence
defeats distance-based statistical defenses. To counter
this, we propose a semantic feature extraction method
in the Hardness-Gradient space. By mapping sample
hardness as weights into the update space, this approach
amplifies the inherent conflict between poisoning and

primary tasks, achieving precise isolation of stealthy
attackers even as gradient norms vanish.
2) Proposing CHG-Shapley, an Efficient and
Verification-Data-Free
Valuation
Algorithm:
Overcoming the exponential computational complexity
and proxy-data reliance of traditional Shapley values,
we derive a closed-form solution based on the
composite Hardness-Gradient utility. This reduces
valuation complexity to a constant level, providing a
real-time, privacy-preserving assessment mechanism
highly suitable for large-scale federated systems.
3) Designing Secure-CHG, an Adaptive Full-Lifecycle
Framework: Abandoning static defense strategies, we
construct a dynamic pipeline that toggles based on
convergence state. A cascaded statistical filter stabilizes
early-stage oscillation, while a trust-modulated aggregation mechanism organically unifies late-stage malicious
node defense with benign participant incentivization at
the architectural level.
4) Extensive Empirical Validation Against Advanced
Threats: Evaluations across multi-modal datasets
(CIFAR-10, MedMNIST, NEU-SDDB) demonstrate
Secure-CHG’s superiority. Compared to mainstream robust baselines (e.g., Krum, Trimmed Mean), it significantly suppresses late-stage advanced backdoors and
label-flipping attacks, drastically reducing the Attack
Success Rate (ASR) while preserving high global model
utility across diverse heterogeneous scenarios.
B. Related Works
1) Defense Mechanisms in Federated Learning: Existing FL defenses primarily fall into four categories, each
facing inherent limitations. First, statistical and geometric approaches—–such as Krum [6], RFA [9], Trimmed
Mean/Median [7], FoolsGold [10], and FLTrust [11]–
—universally suffer from “Late-stage Failure.” As models
converge, shrinking update norms cause statistical homogenization, rendering geometric discrepancies negligible and
crippling detection sensitivity. Second, reinforcement learning
and game-theoretic defenses [12], [13] offer adaptability but
incur exorbitant computational costs and unrealistically rely
on clean validation sets for reward signals. Third, differential privacy-inspired methods, including [14]–[17], physically
constrain update magnitudes. However, gradient clipping and
high-variance noise fundamentally disrupt optimization, decelerating convergence and degrading model accuracy [3].
Finally, defenses utilizing proxy datasets or server-side trust
roots [18]–[21] overcome the lack of objective reference
frames but paradoxically violate FL’s core privacy principles
and incur massive computational overhead due to domain gaps
in synthetic data.
2) Contribution Evaluation Mechanisms in Federated
Learning: Existing contribution evaluation mechanisms in FL
primarily fall into three categories. First, Shapley Value (SV)
methods [22]–[24] provide a robust theoretical foundation.
Despite lightweight approximations like auxiliary model fitting
[25], GTG-Shapley [26], and FedCon [27], the prohibitive

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

computational overhead remains an insurmountable bottleneck for massive networks or high-dimensional models [28].
Second, gradient consistency approaches utilize metrics like
cosine similarity as an SV proxy to assess contributions efficiently [29], [30]. However, this geometric paradigm harbors
a significant fairness flaw: it inherently rewards conformity.
Minority clients with rare features naturally generate divergent gradients and are unjustly penalized as low-similarity
outliers, failing to reflect their authentic value. Finally, proxy
dataset-dependent evaluations quantify client value based on
an independent validation set [31]–[34]. These methods face
a fundamental logical paradox: their efficacy relies entirely
on an omniscient, unbiased, and centralized proxy dataset,
which contradicts the decentralized premise of FL and severely
curtails their practical viability.
C. Paper Organization
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. After presenting preliminaries in Section II, Sections III–VI introduce
our secure hybrid defense framework, covering serial filtering,
CHG verification, and unified trust mechanisms. Finally, Section VII discusses experimental evaluations, and Section VIII
concludes.
II. P RELIMINARIES
In this section, we first give some necessary definitions that
will be used in the rest of the paper. Table I summarizes the
notation used in our paper.
A. Federated Learning
Federated Learning (FL) enables collaborative model training while preserving local data privacy. At each round t,
selected clients compute local model updates ∆θkt using
their private data Dk . The central server then updates the
global model by aggregating these localPupdates via weighted
K
k
∆θkt , where
averaging (e.g., FedAvg): θt+1 = θt + k=1 Nntotal
Ntotal is the total number of participating data samples.
B. Poisoning Attacks in Federated Learning
Within the federated paradigm, poisoning attacks inject
malicious updates to subvert the global model, categorized
by objectives (untargeted vs. targeted) and execution means
(data vs. model poisoning). Untargeted attacks indiscriminately degrade overall convergence, whereas targeted attacks
stealthily misclassify specific samples while preserving maintask performance. To achieve these goals, adversaries generate
statistically camouflaged updates via two prominent strategies:
• Label Flipping (LF) Attack: Attackers manipulate their
dataset Dk by changing the label of samples from class
a to class b.
• Backdoor Attack (BA): Attackers implant a specific
pattern (trigger) into samples and assign a target label,
causing the global model to output the target label for
polluted samples. Recent advancements in these threats
also include collusive attacks that optimize triggers to
further evade detection [35].

3

TABLE I
N OTATIONS
Symbol

Description

K
K
η
ϵ
θt
θkt+1
∆θkt
∆θt
θt+1
Dk
nk
N
Ntotal
i
L
Lj
f (θ)
f (i; θ)
∇f (θ)
∇last Lk
U (S)
ϕi (U )
S
hi
C(S)
xi
θx
sim(j, t)
ζj
β
Tjt
Tt
γ
λ
Ckt
Wkt

Total number of clients
Set of clients
Learning rate
Small positive number (numerical stability/threshold)
Global model parameters at round t
Local model parameters of client k
Model update of client k
Average of update vectors from all clients
Aggregated global model
Local dataset of client k
Data volume of client k
Set of all data points
Total data volume of all participants
Index of a single data point
Loss function
Loss of client j
Loss of model under parameters θ
Loss of data point i
Gradient of the loss function
Last-layer gradient of client k
Utility function of subset S
Shapley value of data point i
Subset of data points
Hardness of data point i
Proxy utility function
Gradient of data point i
Parameters updated using gradient x
Cosine similarity
Instantaneous trust score
EMA decay factor
Long-term reputation of client j
Average reputation score
Relative contribution filtering factor
Reputation modulation rate
Instantaneous contribution of client k
List of safe nodes

C. Shapley Value
Originating from cooperative game theory, the Shapley
Value is considered the “gold standard” for data valuation.
Ghorbani & Zou [36] introduced Data Shapley, treating each
data point (or client) as a “player.” The utility function U (S)
represents the model performance (e.g., accuracy) trained on
a subset S. The Shapley value is defined as:
ϕi (U ) =

X
S⊆K\{i}

|S|!(K − |S| − 1)!
[U (S∪{i})−U (S)] (1)
K!

This formulation computes the weighted marginal contribution
of player i across all possible coalitions. While it satisfies
fairness axioms (efficiency, symmetry, etc.), its exact computation requires evaluating 2K subsets, resulting in exponential
complexity. This computational bottleneck severely limits its
applicability in large-scale FL systems.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

4

III. T HE S ECURE -CHG H YBRID D EFENSE F RAMEWORK
In this section, we first give the problem statement, including the threat model and the core challenges. Then, we
present the overall architecture of our proposed hybrid defense
framework.
A. Problem Statement
1) System Model: Consider a Federated Learning system
consisting of a central server and K clients. The server
maintains the global model parameters θt , while clients train
models on local datasets and upload the updates to the server.
Federated Learning proceeds in iterative rounds. The workflow for each round (round t) includes the following steps:
1) Broadcast: The server broadcasts the current global
model parameters θt to the selected clients.
2) Local Training: Clients perform local training on private datasets to obtain local model updates.
3) Upload: Clients upload round-specific training information to the server.
4) Aggregation & Update: The server performs detection,
evaluation, and aggregation on the information uploaded
by clients to generate the new global model θt+1 .
To support defense and contribution evaluation mechanisms,
clients are required to upload the following three types of
information to the server in each training round:
• Local Model Update ∆θk : Captures the parameter
update for the k-th client.
last
• Last-Layer Gradient ∇k : Extracted from the last
layer of the neural network, used to characterize model
behavior.
• Sample Hardness Scalar hk : Quantifies the difficulty of
fitting the current global model on the client’s local data.
The server performs defense and aggregation operations solely
based on the uploaded information described above, without
accessing the clients’ raw training data throughout the process.
2) Problem Formulation and Assumptions: To rigorously
analyze the phenomenon of Late-stage Failure, we introduce
the following assumptions. These assumptions characterize
the typical operating environment of FL during the model
convergence phase without loss of generality.
Assumption 1 (Convergence Bounds): In the late stage
of training, the global model parameters θ enter a stable
convergence region. Consequently, the L2 -norms of local
model updates from all clients decay as training progresses.
Specifically, there exists a sequence of positive scalars ϵt such
that:
∥∆θkt ∥ ≤ ϵt , where lim ϵt = 0,
(2)
t→∞

holds for any client k.
Assumption 2 (Benign Update Distribution): During
the convergence phase, model updates from honest clients
are modeled as zero-mean random perturbations satisfying a
bounded second moment condition:
E[∆θht ] = 0,

E[∥∆θht ∥2 ] ≤ σ 2 .

(3)

Assumption 3 (Adversarial Constraints): To evade detection in the late stage, malicious clients are constrained

to maintain stealth. Their submitted updates are bounded in
magnitude to the same order as the perturbations of honest
clients:
∥∆θat ∥ ≤ c · ϵt ,
(4)
where c is a constant scaling factor.
Assumption 4 (Zero-Trust Server): The server possesses
no auxiliary clean validation data or trusted proxy models.
All defense and evaluation decisions rely exclusively on the
uploaded model updates and their derived features.
3) Threat Model: We adopt a time-varying Byzantine threat
model. Let K denote the set of participating clients, where
an unknown subset A ⊂ K is controlled by an adversary,
satisfying |A| ≤ f and f < |K|/2. Clients outside A (i.e.,
K \ A) are considered honest. The adversary fully controls
their local datasets, training processes, and uploaded updates.
At the communication level, malicious clients follow the FL
protocol and do not tamper with message passing or interrupt the training process. However, adversaries may pursue
multiple objectives during training, including degrading global
model performance or manipulating contribution assessment
and incentive distribution.
a) Early Stage (Destructive Redirection and Convergence
Stagnation): In the early stages of training, the global model
remains far from convergence, and client updates typically
exhibit large magnitudes and high variability. During this
phase, malicious clients actively disrupt the training process by
uploading updates designed to induce instability or oscillation
in the global optimization trajectory. Such behaviors aim to
delay convergence and destabilize optimization.
b) Late Stage (Covert Persistence and Incentive Theft):
As training progresses and the global model gradually converges, the magnitude of client updates decays toward zero. In
this stage, the adversary’s goal shifts from explicit destruction
to covert persistence. This means the adversary maintains
attack behaviors that minimize impact on the main task performance while attempting to manipulate contribution assessment
and incentive distribution (i.e., Incentive Theft).
Definition 1 (Late-stage Failure): Let the Federated Learning system contain a client set N = B ∪ M. In training round
t, client k uploads model update vector ∆θkt . When the global
model θt tends to converge (t → ∞), the system enters a
failure state satisfying the following condition: as the model
converges, to fine-tune the model, the L2 -norms of all client
update vectors approach zero:
lim ∥∆θkt ∥2 = 0, ∀k ∈ N

t→∞

(5)

c) Adaptive Strategic Dormancy: In addition to the twostage attack behaviors described above, we further consider
a White-box Adaptive Adversary who has full knowledge of
the defense and trust update mechanisms. Such an adversary
may employ a strategy of Adaptive Strategic Dormancy.
Specifically, in the early stages of training, the adversary intentionally behaves benignly. This strategy allows the adversary
to accumulate substantial historical trust through the system’s
trust update mechanism (e.g., Exponential Moving Average).
Once the global model enters the late convergence stage and
sufficient trust has been established, the adversary adaptively

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

switches to malicious behavior, leveraging the inertia of accumulated historical trust to evade immediate detection.
B. Overall Framework Architecture
To address these problems formalized in Section III-A,
we propose the Secure-CHG framework, which abandons
static defense mechanisms in favor of a Dynamic Governance
Pipeline that is tightly coupled with the model’s convergence
state. The core philosophy of the framework is to employ highprecision statistical filtering during the early training phase to
navigate through the oscillation period rapidly. Subsequently,
upon detecting that the model has entered the convergence
phase (the potential “Late-stage Failure” period), the system
seamlessly transitions to a contribution verification mode
based on sample hardness.
1) Client Layer: Local Training and Feature Extraction:
Functioning as the edge computing nodes of the system,
each client k performs two primary tasks in every round
t: local model optimization and the extraction of defenserelated features. To facilitate the subsequent hybrid defense
and contribution assessment, the client uploads a tuple Mkt =
{∆θkt , ∇last Lk , hk } to the server, where ∆θkt represents the
model update, ∇last Lk denotes the gradient of the last layer,
and hk indicates the sample hardness.
2) Server Layer: Convergence-Aware Dynamic Governance: The server acts as the central decision-making unit.
Its processing workflow consists of three serially connected
stages: State Monitoring & Routing, Dual-mode Defense, and
Trust Aggregation.
a) State Monitoring & Routing: This module serves as
the control center of the architecture. Prior to each aggregation
round, the server assesses the physical stage of the global
model based on the historical trend of the global loss. The
system triggers a state transition by monitoring the ratio of
the instantaneous loss reduction rate (Icurrent ) to the historical
average rate (Iavg ). The specific logic is detailed in Algorithm
1.
Based on the status flag new state returned by Algorithm
1, the system dynamically routes the data stream to distinct
defense pathways:
• Early Stage (new state = False): During unconverged
loss oscillations, the defense prioritizes purifying the
optimization environment. Data flows to Path A (Serial
Statistical Filtering → CHG Contribution Verification) to eliminate high-amplitude outliers and accelerate
convergence.
• Late Stage (new state = True): Triggered when convergence conditions (Iavg ≤ ϵ or Icurrent < γ·Iavg ) are met.
As gradient norms decay, statistical features fail (Latestage Failure). The system shifts to Path B (Direct CHG
Contribution Verification), bypassing statistical filters to
identify covert malicious nodes at the semantic level via
CHG-Shapley.
• Hysteresis & Anti-Jittering: To prevent frequent state
switching (“jittering”) caused by local SGD oscillations,
the Late Stage state is locked once triggered. The system
reverts to the Early Stage only if a severe loss rebound
(Icurrent < −δ) is detected.

5

Algorithm 1 Adaptive Stage Switching Logic
Require: History of global loss values L, Current epoch index
t, Boolean flag is converged (False=Early, True=Late)
1: Parameters: window = 5 (Smoothing window size), ϵ =
10−6 (Stagnation threshold), γ = 0.5 (Slowdown ratio
threshold), δ = 0.1 (Reset threshold)
2: Icurrent = L[t − 1] − L[t] {Calculate instant improvement}
3: Iavg = (L[t−window −1]−L[t−1])/window {Calculate

smoothed historical improvement}
4: if is converged == False then
5:
if (Iavg ≤ ϵ) or (Icurrent < γ · Iavg ) then
6:
new state = True {Switch to Late Stage (Contribu-

tion Verification)}
7:
else
8:
new state = False {Remain in Early Stage}
9:
end if
10: else
11:
if Icurrent < −δ then

new state = False {Reset to Early Stage (Defense
against collapse)}
13:
else
14:
new state = True {Lock in Late Stage (Maintain
stability)}
15:
end if
16: end if
17: return new state

12:

b) Dual-Mode Defense & Evaluation: Depending on
the routing decision, the system activates the corresponding
processing logic:
Module 1: Serial Statistical Filtering
This module is strategically positioned for the Early Stage
of Federated Learning. During this phase, the un-converged
global model is highly susceptible to malicious gradients that
can severely deviate the optimization direction. To ensure
system integrity and balance computational feasibility, we
employ a Serial Statistical Filtering approach, progressing
from “Macro Direction” to “Micro Structure”:
• Pass 1: Coarse-grained Macro Screening. Using the full
parameter update vector ∆θ, the system calculates cosine
similarity to rapidly discard updates that exhibit negative
similarity, indicating redirection attacks that deviate from
the group consensus.
• Pass 2: Fine-grained Micro Screening. For updates
passing the initial screening, the FL-Defender module
analyzes the principal component distribution of the lastlayer gradients ∇last L, filtering out nodes with anomalous
micro-structures.
Output: A filtered list of secure nodes Wkt . The decision state
wkt for client k in round t is defined as:
(
1, if sim(k, t) ≥ 0 AND Hkt > Q1t0
t
wk =
(6)
0, otherwise (identified as malicious)
If wkt = 0, the node is assigned a zero weight for the current
round.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

6

Fig. 2. The overall architecture of the Secure-CHG framework. The system features a dynamic governance pipeline that adapts to the convergence state,
switching between “Early-stage Defense” and “Late-stage Defense” mechanisms.

Module 2: CHG Contribution Verification
This module performs distinct core functions depending on
the training stage:
• Early Stage (Path A - Serial Mode): Functions as a
secondary defense layer. It performs fine-grained value
quantification on nodes that survived Module 1, preventing sophisticated attackers from accumulating unearned
credit. Nodes rejected by Module 1 (wkt = 0) are skipped,
and their contribution is set to zero (Ckt = 0).
• Late Stage (Path B - Direct Mode): Functions as the
primary line of defense. When gradient norm decay renders traditional statistical features ineffective, this module
takes over using the CHG-Shapley mechanism. It identifies and eliminates malicious nodes that are statistically
indistinguishable from benign nodes but lack genuine
semantic contribution.
Mechanism: This module utilizes a “Hardness-Gradient”
composite metric ∇last L · hk to distinguish nodes semantically.
Benign nodes exhibit a hardness hk → 0, whereas attackers
maintain a high hk due to conflicts between the poisoning task
and the main task.
Output: Based on the Shapley value Ckt (calculated via the
algorithm in Section V), nodes with negative or negligible contribution values (associated with high hardness) are assigned
zero weight, achieving precise mitigation of covert attacks.
c) Unified Trust Update & Aggregation: Regardless of
the processing path, the final instantaneous contribution value
(Ckt ) is integrated into the unified dynamic trust module.
• Long-term Reputation Modeling: The system employs
an Exponential Moving Average (EMA) to transform
instantaneous contributions into a long-term reputation
score Tkt , thereby mitigating the impact of intermittent
attacks.

•

Reputation Modulated Aggregation: The final aggregation weight wfinal is derived from both the instantaneous
contribution and the long-term reputation. The server
applies this weight to ∆θkt to update the global model
θt+1 .

This architecture ensures a smooth transition from morphological detection to contribution verification, guaranteeing
robustness and fairness throughout the entire lifecycle of the
Federated Learning process.
IV. S ERIAL S TATISTICAL F ILTERING
As discussed in Section III-B, the statistical filtering module
within the proposed framework is strategically tailored for
the Early Stage (Oscillation Period) of Federated Learning
(FL). During this phase, the primary objective is to establish
a robust filtering mechanism to eliminate anomalous gradients
that could otherwise derail the global optimization trajectory.
While existing works offer various Byzantine-robust aggregation algorithms, such as Krum [6], Median [7], and RFA [9],
ensuring the systemic integrity of the Secure-CHG governance
framework across the temporal spectrum—while balancing
deployment feasibility with real-time monitoring—necessitates
a streamlined approach. Consequently, we employ a serial
filtering mechanism that integrates Cosine Similarity with FLDefender as the preliminary defense module.
A. Macro-Level Coarse Screening: Cosine Similarity Filtering
This framework prioritizes Cosine Similarity over Euclidean
Distance [6], [7], [9] as an initial defense to precisely intercept
redirection attacks (e.g., sign-flipping) that attempt to divert
the global optimization trajectory.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

7

1) Constructing the Consensus Benchmark: P
The server
K
1
t
calculates the mean update vector ∆θt = K
k=1 ∆θk ,
representing the collective benign consensus direction for the
current iteration.
2) Directional Consistency Metric: We evaluate the cosine
similarity between each client’s update ∆θjt and the consensus
∆θt :
∆θjt · ∆θt
sim(j, t) =
(7)
∥∆θjt ∥ · ∥∆θt ∥
3) Anomaly Determination: Clients with a negative cosine
similarity (sim(j, t) < 0) are excluded. A negative score indicates a directional deviation exceeding 90◦ , reliably signifying
a malicious attempt to oppose the majority intent.
B. Micro-Level Fine Screening: FL-Defender
Macro screening may miss Targeted Poisoning Attacks (e.g.,
Backdoors) that embed malicious intent within a tiny fraction
of dimensions to evade full-parameter statistical detection [8].
In high-dimensional models (e.g., ResNet-18), these minute
alterations are easily masked by the vast majority of benign
parameters, rendering full-model cosine similarity ineffective.
To address this, FL-Defender specifically analyzes Lastlayer Gradients via Principal Component Analysis (PCA),
isolating micro-structural anomalies where attack intent is
most concentrated.
1) Theoretical Justification: Mathematical Necessity of Attack Intent: For a C-class task, the predicted probability pi
for class i is:
eoi
(8)
pi = PC
oj
j=1 e
Minimizing Cross-Entropy Loss L(y, p) yields the last-layer
weight gradient:
∇wiL =

∂L
= (pi − yi ) · aL−1
∂wiL

Algorithm 2 FL-Defender Micro-Filtering
Require: Set of clients K (post macro-filtering), Last-layer
gradients {∇last Lj }j∈K , Previous trust history Hprev
Ensure: Current trust Hcurrent , Boolean flags is benign
1: // Phase 1: Feature Engineering
2: for j ∈ K do
3:
gj = L2 Normalize(∇last Lj )
4: end for
5: Initialize Similarity Matrix S ∈ R|K|×|K|
6: for i = 1 to |K| do
7:
for j = 1 to |K| do
8:
S[i, j] = CosineSimilarity(gi , gj )
9:
end for
10:
Vi = S[i, :] {Feature vector extraction}
11: end for
12: // Phase 2: Dimensionality Reduction
13: Vall = Stack(V1 , . . . , V|K| )
14: Vreduced = PCA(Vall , dims = 2) {Project to latent space}
15: // Phase 3: Anomaly Scoring
16: centroid = GeometricMedian(Vreduced )
17: for j ∈ K do
18:
ζj = CosineSimilarity(Vreduced [j], centroid)
19: end for
20: // Phase 4: Trust Update & Filtering
21: Initialize Hcurrent as zeros
22: for j ∈ K do
23:
Hcurrent [j] = β ·Hprev [j]+(1−β)·ζj {EMA smoothing}
24: end for
25: Q1 = FirstQuartile(Hcurrent )
26: for j ∈ K do
27:
is benign[j] = (Hcurrent [j] > Q1) {Threshold-based
filtering}
28: end for
29: return Hcurrent , is benign

(9)

To misclassify samples, an attacker must alter the training
target y, significantly deviating the error term δi = pi − yi .
This fundamental attack signature is strongest in the last layer
and dilutes in earlier network layers.
2) Noise Reduction via PCA: To distinguish adversarial
deviations from benign Non-IID data variations, FL-Defender
applies PCA to the gradient similarity matrix. This provides
two key benefits:
1) Suppression of Benign Variance: Filters random highdimensional perturbations as noise.
2) Amplification of Structural Deviation: Highlights consistent malicious anomalies.
Clients are then evaluated based on their deviation from the
projected geometric centroid.
3) Algorithm Implementation: FL-Defender ensures a clean
input distribution by filtering statistically anomalous structures
during the early training phase. The procedure is detailed in
Algorithm 2.
FL-Defender robustly filters malicious clients using an Exponential Moving Average (EMA) mechanism to evaluate historical trust. By computing Hcurrent [j] = β·Hprev [j]+(1−β)·ζj ,

it acts as a low-pass filter to smooth benign Non-IID fluctuations while effectively preventing adaptive attackers from
erasing their historical malicious footprint via intermittent
camouflage.
While morphology-based statistical defenses (like FLDefender) excel during the early stages of training, they inevitably fail upon model convergence. Therefore, we introduce
an orthogonal, contribution-based mechanism—the CHGShapley algorithm (Section V)—to guarantee full-lifecycle
robustness.

V. CHG C ONTRIBUTION V ERIFICATION
In this section, we first provide a rigorous theoretical
analysis of the “Late-stage Failure” inherent in existing
morphology-based statistical defenses. Second, to overcome
this critical bottleneck, we then propose an efficient contribution evaluation algorithm that explicitly amplifies the semantic
differences between benign and malicious updates, restoring
their separability even as gradient norms diminish.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

A. Theoretical Analysis of Late-stage Failure
Once the model is successfully purified and its convergence
is accelerated during the early stages, the norms of benign gradients decay naturally. Capitalizing on this physical dynamic,
adversaries immediately pivot into a stealth mode, thereby
instigating a more insidious crisis defined as Late-stage Failure
(Definition 1).
As formalized in Definition 1, since limt→∞ ∥∆θkt ∥2 = 0,
t
the discrepancy δstat
between malicious and benign updates in
statistical features—such as geometric distance and directional
consistency—approaches zero. Consequently, the detection
sensitivity of any defense mechanism contingent on the morphology of ∆θ plummets precipitously, ultimately culminating in complete failure. Fundamentally, attackers exploit the
gradient decay properties inherent to the model’s convergence
process to achieve “statistical invisibility.” During this stage, a
rational adversary will employ a “covert fine-tuning” strategy,
deliberately compressing their update norms to a minuscule
magnitude of the same order as benign updates (i.e., ϵbounded).
This renders conventional measurement metrics entirely
ineffective. In the following, we elucidate this multi-faceted
failure across three dimensions: Euclidean distance, directional
metrics, and microscopic discrimination:
Failure of Euclidean Distance-Based Defenses (e.g.,
Krum)
Consider a d-dimensional parameter space. Algorithms like
Krum rely on computing the Euclidean distance ∥u − v∥2 between update vectors. In the late convergence stage,
√ the norm
of benign updates decays such that ∥∆θbenign ∥2 ≈ dσt → 0.
The expected squared distance between benign nodes i and j
is E[∥∆θi − ∆θj ∥22 ] = 2dσt2 . To evade detection, a malicious
node m constrains its update within
√ the neighborhood of
benign updates, establishing ∥δ∥ ≈ dσt . Consequently, the
expected distance between a malicious node and a benign
node, E[∥∆θi − ∆θm ∥22 ], falls into the exact same order of
magnitude O(dσt2 ) as the intra-class distance among benign
nodes. Governed by the concentration of measure phenomenon
in high-dimensional spaces, when σt approaches infinitesimal
levels, the overlap region between the benign and malicious
distributions is maximized. This homogenization completely
prevents distance-ranking defense algorithms from distinguishing adversaries from benign statistical noise.
Failure of Directional Metrics (Cosine Similarity)
u·v
Cosine similarity is defined as sim(u, v) = ∥u∥∥v∥
. In the
lateP
convergence stage, the global average update ∆θavg ≈
1
∆θbenign degenerates toward random noise tightly clus|B|
tered around the zero vector. As ∥∆θavg ∥ → 0, cosine similarity becomes extremely sensitive to minuscule perturbations. If
the adversary generates a vector δ that perfectly mimics zeromean random noise, then: limt→∞ P (sim(∆θmal , ∆θavg ) <
0) ≈ P (sim(∆θbenign , ∆θavg ) < 0) ≈ 0.5. At this critical
juncture, the cosine similarity distributions of malicious and
benign nodes perfectly overlap, rendering simple sign thresholds or numerical truncation indistinguishable. This signifies
that the macroscopic rough screening discussed in Section
IV-A fundamentally loses its requisite statistical baseline.

8

Failure of Microscopic Discrimination
Concurrently, the FL-Defender microscopic fine screening
detailed in Section IV-B encounters an identical detection
bottleneck. In the late convergence stage, the feature extraction layers stabilize, yielding an exceedingly low variance
for benign gradients. Here, attackers only need to inject
vanishingly weak trigger signals to sustain the backdoor.
These subtle signals conceal themselves within a massive
parameter background, no longer manifesting as pronounced
principal component anomalies. The “structural deviations”
that FL-Defender attempts to extract via Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) are effortlessly submerged by the inherent
heterogeneous noise of Non-IID data distributions.
Formally, assume the distribution of benign gradients is
∆θbenign ∼ N (0, σt2 I), where σt converges to an infinitesimal
value ϵ. Covert attackers construct their updates as ∆θmal = δ,
subject to ∥δ∥ ≈ ϵ. Let Σ denote the covariance matrix of
the last-layer gradients. In the early stages, the attack signal
S is dominant such that ∥Σattack ∥ ≫ ∥Σnoise ∥, allowing the
attack features to dictate the primary principal component
v1 . However, in the late stage, the benign gradient variance
σt2 collapses, and attackers strategically compress their signal
strength to ∥δ∥ ≤ σt for stealth. Consequently, the principal
components extracted by PCA are predominantly dictated
by the intrinsic noise variance of Non-IID data rather than
adversarial features. The projection P (∆θmal ) of malicious
samples in the principal component space strictly satisfies:
∥P (∆θmal ) − Centroid∥2 ≤ ∥P (∆θbenign ) − Centroid∥2 (10)
This inequality proves that malicious samples fall squarely
within the confidence interval of benign nodes, rendering FLDefender’s anomaly detection mathematically obsolete.
In summary, the essence of Late-stage Failure lies in
the morphological homogenization of updates: as the global
model converges and gradient norms vanish, stealthy malicious
updates become statistically indistinguishable from benign
ones. This fundamental collapse of geometric defenses directly
triggers a catastrophic surge in the Attack Success Rate (ASR)
of advanced poisoning techniques.
B. CHG-Shapley: Efficient Contribution Evaluation Algorithm
As discussed in Section V-A, the fundamental cause of
Late-stage Failure is the collapse of geometric separability
as gradient norms diminish. An intuitive solution to resolve
this is to explicitly amplify the direct semantic differences.
We observe that malicious nodes inherently struggle to fit
their anomalous poisoned samples, causing their associated
training loss—or Hardness (hi )—to remain persistently higher
than that of regular nodes. Furthermore, their gradient update directions inevitably diverge from the benign consensus.
Therefore, Secure-CHG shifts the defense paradigm from
analyzing superficial “Statistical Morphology” to verifying
genuine contribution values based on this intrinsic semantic
difference.
By strategically coupling the persistent hardness with the
gradient, Secure-CHG projects the updates into a novel
“Hardness-Gradient” Semantic Space. In this space, the scalar

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

hardness acts as a natural amplifier for malicious intent. Even
as the raw geometric distance between parameter updates
collapses (limt→∞ ∥∆θi −∆θm ∥2 = 0), this composite mechanism successfully magnifies the subtle adversarial traces,
decisively highlighting and isolating the malicious nodes from
the benign cluster. This restorative separability is visually and
empirically corroborated by the distinct clustering transitions
shown in Fig. 9(b) and 9(c).
Ultimately, by explicitly incorporating the semantic variable
hi , CHG-Shapley maintains a non-zero statistical distance
between benign actors and malicious actors, effectively circumventing the theoretical limitations of geometric defenses
in the late training stage.
To translate this restored separability within the “HardnessGradient” semantic space into practically quantifiable node
contributions, the crux lies in seamlessly embedding it into
the Shapley value evaluation framework. To achieve this,
we must establish a utility function U (S) that accurately
reflects the authentic value of a data subset S. Traditionally,
U (S) is defined as the model’s accuracy on a validation set
after retraining on S, which is computationally prohibitive in
federated settings.
To circumvent the need for retraining, a common alternative
is to evaluate the model’s training loss reduction caused
by the
P parameter update. Let the global loss be f (θ) :=
1
update step using a generic
i∈N f (i; θ). Consider an P
Ntotal
1
aggregated raw gradient g = |S|
i∈S ∇f (i; θ), yielding new
parameters θg = θ − ηg.
Lemma 1 (Nesterov, 2018): For a differentiable function f
with M -Lipschitz continuous gradients, if η = 1/M , the loss
reduction is bounded by:
f (θg ) ≤ f (θ) −

1
1
∥∇f (θ)∥22 +
∥∇f (θ) − g∥22 (11)
2M
2M

Equation (11) implies that the loss reduction is fundamentally tied to the alignment between the update direction g
and the global gradient ∇f (θ). This mathematical property
naturally suggests a retraining-free proxy utility: C(S) ∝
∥∇f (θ)∥22 − ∥∇f (θ) − g∥22 .
However, here lies a bottleneck: relying on raw gradients g
falls victim to the Late-stage Failure. As the model converges,
raw gradients vanish, and the proxy utility C(S) completely
loses its discriminative power against stealthy adversaries.
To break this bottleneck and evaluate genuine contributions
post-convergence, we must project this proxy framework into
the “Hardness-Gradient” space. Instead of using raw vanishing
gradients, we introduce sample hardness hi = f (i; θ) to
explicitly scale the local gradients, defining a composite vector
xi = hi ∇f (i; θ). Because malicious samples inherently maintain persistently high hardness, this semantic scaling amplifies
adversarial traces and prevents their vectors from vanishing.
By replacing the raw gradientsPwith the hardness-weighted
1
vectors (i.e., mapping g → |S|
i∈S xi and ∇f (θ) → α =
P
1
x
),
we
construct
our
final
utility function, the CHG
i∈N i
N
Score:
2
1 X
2
U (S) = ∥α∥2 −
xi − α
(12)
|S|
i∈S

2

9

P
where xi = hi ∇f (i; θ) and α = N1 i∈N xi . This utility
function rewards subsets whose update directions align with
the global optimization direction weighted by sample hardness.
To bridge this theoretical formulation with practical Federated Learning deployments, we must circumvent the prohibitive communication overhead of transmitting instancelevel, full-parameter gradients. Therefore, we explicitly operationalize this metric at the client level. Specifically, we
define the direct input to the CHG-Shapley algorithm as the
composite “Hardness-Gradient” vector xk = ∇last Lk · hk .
By feeding this layer-specific, hardness-scaled semantic vector
into the evaluation module as the definitive input, we effectively compress the required state space while fully preserving the distinct adversarial traces. Consequently, this utility
function elegantly rewards clients whose structural update
directions align with the global trajectory, heavily scaled by
their localized sample hardness.
Based on the derivation in Appendix A, we derive a ClosedForm Solution for the Shapley value based on the proposed
quadratic utility function. Leveraging the linearity axiom, we
decompose U (S) into linear combinations of basic functions
and derive the marginal contributions analytically.
Theorem 1: Assuming the utility function U (S) defined in
Eq. (12), the Shapley value ϕk (U ) for the k-th client is given
by the following closed-form expression:
Remark 1: Eq. (13) represents the closed-form structural
solution derived from combinatorial expansion, which involves
harmonic sums over the dataset size nk . This bypasses the
exponential complexity of traditional Shapley computation.
Operationally, CHG-Shapley functions as a single-round
marginal contribution proxy evaluated along the realized training path. It efficiently captures how a client’s update enhances
the model’s capacity to generalize on difficult samples without
requiring exhaustive coalition enumeration.

VI. U NIFIED T RUST U PDATE AND AGGREGATION
Building on the CHG-Shapley contribution scores Ckt derived in Section V, this section introduces a dynamic reputation assessment mechanism to precisely identify malicious
clients. Ultimately, these reputation scores are integrated into
the final weighted aggregation to completely neutralize adversarial impacts.

A. Contribution-based Dynamic Reputation Assessment
1) Logarithmic Scaling: To mitigate the influence of outliers and compress the dynamic range of contribution values,
we apply a logarithmic scaling function to the instantaneous
contributions Ckt of benign clients that have successfully
passed the defense filtering (as detailed in Section IV):
t
wraw
(k) = log(1 + max(Ckt , ϵ))

(14)

Here, ϵ is a small constant (e.g., 10−9 ) introduced to ensure
numerical stability.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

"
ϕk (U ) =

X
j∈Dk

nk
1 X
1

nk
X
1

nk
X
1

!

 P

Pnk 1
nk 1
1
2 2 l=1
−
2
−
1
+
2
l=1 l
l
nk
 ∥xj ∥22
+
nk (nk − 1)(nk − 2)

1
+
−3
l
l2
nk
l=1
l=1

Pnk 1
nk 1
1
1
2
X
l=1 l −
l=1 l2 − nk + n2k
−
⟨
xi , xj ⟩
(nk − 1)(nk − 2)
i∈N
Pnk 1
Pnk 1
2
1
X
2 l=1
l=1 l2 − 1 + nk
l −2
xi
+
nk (nk − 1)(nk − 2)
i∈N
!
!
Pnk 1
Pnk 1
Pnk 1 2
1
1
X
−
2
−
2
2
l=1 l
l=2 l
l=2 l2 − 1 + nk
nk
2
+
−
∥xi ∥2
nk (nk − 1)
nk (nk − 1)(nk − 2)
i∈N
*
+#
Pnk 1
Pnk 1
1
X
2( l=1
2( l=1
l − nk )
l − 1)
+
⟨xj , α⟩ −
xi , α
nk − 1
nk (nk − 1)

−

nk
l2
l=1
P

+

1
nk (nk − 1)

10

2

i∈N

(13)
2) Relative Contribution Filtering: To further marginalize low-quality nodes that evade initial defense mechanisms
but offer negligible contributions, we implement a relative
performance-based filter. First, a baseline adjustment is performed by subtracting a scaled minimum contribution:


t
t
t
wadj
(k) = max 0, wraw
(k) − γ · min(wraw
(i))
(15)
i

B. Reputation Modulated Aggregation Protocol

where γ is a scaling factor close to 1 (e.g., 0.99). Second, we
t
compute the mean of the adjusted weights, w̄adj
, and establish
t
a quality threshold. Any client with wadj (k) falling below
t
this threshold (e.g., 0.5 · w̄adj
) is classified as a low-quality
contributor for the current round, and their weight is reset
to zero. Following these filtering steps, the remaining weights
are normalized to derive the instantaneous normalized weights,
t
winst
(k), for the current round.
3) Long-term Reputation (Trust) Update: The core of the
dynamic reputation mechanism relies on a long-term reputation score, Tkt , maintained for each client k. This score
is updated using an Exponential Moving Average (EMA)
to smooth short-term fluctuations and build trust based on
historical behavior:
t
Tkt = βTkt−1 + (1 − β)winst
(k)

(16)

where β ∈ [0, 1] is the decay factor. A higher β places greater
emphasis on historical performance, thereby stabilizing the
reputation score against transient anomalies.
4) Trust-Modulated Aggregation Weight: The final aggret
gation weight, wtrust
(k), for client k in round t is determined
by a linear combination of its instantaneous contribution,
t
winst
(k), and its deviation from the population’s average
reputation, T t . Specifically:
t
t
wtrust
(k) = winst
(k) + λ(Tkt − T t )

we obtain the definitive weights for the global model update. This mechanism seamlessly integrates defense (filtering
Ckt = 0), evaluation (computing Ckt ), and incentives (deriving
wft inal (k)), thereby establishing a robust and adaptive federated governance loop.

(17)

where λ represents the reputation modulation rate. This formulation ensures that a client with a superior historical reputation
(Tkt > T t ) receives a weight incentive, effectively buffering
against minor fluctuations in instantaneous contribution. Conversely, clients with poor historical performance are penalized.
By enforcing non-negativity via clipping (wft inal (k) =
t
max(0, wtrust
(k))) and performing a final normalization,

t
(k), this section
Building upon the modulated weights wtrust
describes the final secure aggregation protocol. The objective
is to translate abstract reputation scores into concrete model
updates, ensuring the global model assimilates knowledge
exclusively from high-reputation, high-contribution nodes.
1) Normalization and Global Model Update: To constrain
the aggregated model parameters within a valid numerical
range and prevent divergence due to weight explosion, we
apply a Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) operation followed
by normalization to derive the final aggregation coefficients
wft inal (k):
t
(k))
max(0, wtrust
t
max(0,
w
trust (j))
j∈K

wft inal (k) = P

(18)

The denominator represents the sum of modulated weights
across all clients. In the extreme case where the denominator is zero (indicating all clients are deemed malicious or
non-contributory), the update is skipped to preserve model
integrity.
Subsequently, the server utilizes these final weights to
compute the weighted average of the update vectors ∆θkt ,
resulting in the global model update:
θt+1 ← θt + ηg

K
X

wft inal (k) · ∆θkt

(19)

k=1

where ηg denotes the global learning rate. This aggregation
mechanism provides dual security guarantees:
• Malicious Exclusion: Nodes identified by defense mechanisms or exhibiting negligible contributions are assigned
wft inal (k) ≈ 0, effectively blocking the injection of
malicious gradients.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

•

Benign Incentive: Benign nodes with consistent historical performance and significant current contributions receive amplified weights, thereby accelerating convergence
toward the optimal solution.

2) Algorithm Description: Overall, the unified aggregation
process is summarized in Algorithm 3.
Algorithm 3 Secure-CHG Unified Trust Aggregation
Require: Client updates {∆θkt , ∇last Lk , hk }k∈K ; Previous
global model θt ; Previous trust scores T t−1 ; Current stage
flag State (Early/Late).
Ensure: New global model θt+1 ; Updated trust scores T t .
t
1: Initialize: winst
← zeros(K), M ask t ← ones(K)
2: // Phase 1: Dual-Mode Defense & Evaluation
3: for each client k ∈ K do
4:
if State is Early Stage then
5:
if
Cosine(∆θkt , ∆θavg )
<
0
or
FL-Defender(∇last Lk ) == Malicious then
6:
M ask t [k] ← 0; continue {Statistical Filtering}
7:
end if
8:
end if
9:
Calculate Ckt ← CHG-Shapley(∆θkt , hk ) using Theorem 1
10: end for
11: // Phase 2: Dynamic Trust Assessment
12: for each client k ∈ K where M ask t [k] = 1 do
t
(k) ← log(1 + max(Ckt , ϵ)) {Log Scaling}
13:
wraw
t
t
t
)) {Relative
(k)−γ ·min(wraw
14:
wadj (k) ← max(0, wraw
Filtering}
15: end for
t
t
16: Normalize wadj
to get winst
t−1
t
t
17: Update Trust: Tk ← βTk
+ (1 − β)winst
(k) {Eq. (16)}
18: // Phase 3: Reputation Modulated Aggregation
t
← Mean(T t )
19: Calculate Average Trust Tavg
20: for each client k ∈ K do
t
t
t
) {Eq. (17)}
(k) ← winst
(k) + λ(Tkt − Tavg
21:
wtrust
22: end for
t
23: Normalize wtrust
to get final weights wft inal {Eq. (18)}

24: Update Global Model: θ t+1 ← θ t + ηg

P

wft inal (k)∆θkt

{Eq. (19)}
θt+1 , T t

25: return

C. System Stability Analysis
While the dynamic weight adjustment mechanism enhances
fairness and security, it introduces the potential for weight
fluctuations that could destabilize training. To guarantee convergence stability, we analyze the Secure-CHG framework
across three dimensions: the smoothness of trust updates, the
boundedness of aggregation weights, and the hysteresis of
defense state switching.
1) Smoothness of Trust Updates: In Federated Learning,
the stochastic nature of mini-batch sampling causes inevitable
statistical fluctuations in a client’s single-round contribution
t
winst
. Directly using instantaneous contributions as weights

11

would induce severe oscillations in the optimization trajectory. Secure-CHG mitigates this via the Exponential Moving
Average (EMA) mechanism (Eq. (16)), which functions as a
low-pass filter. For any time t, the variation in trust value is
constrained by the decay factor β:
t
|Tkt − Tkt−1 | = (1 − β)|winst
(k) − Tkt−1 |

(20)

By setting β close to 1 (e.g., 0.9), the system suppresses singleround anomalies—whether from random noise or adversarial
attempts. This imparts “reputation inertia,” preventing the
weights of benign nodes from collapsing due to transient
low-quality updates while simultaneously preventing attackers
from rapidly accruing trust through sporadic high-quality
disguises.
2) Boundedness of Aggregation Weights: Stability is further
ensured by the boundedness of the aggregation weights. In Eq.
(17), the trust modulation term is λ(Tkt − T t ). Since winst is
normalized (∈ [0, 1]), the long-term reputation Tkt is similarly
constrained to the [0, 1] interval. Consequently, the deviation
t
is bounded within [−λ, 1 +
of the modulated weight wtrust
λ]. When combined with the ReLU non-negative clipping and
final normalization in Eq. (18), we ensure:
K
X

wft inal (k) = 1

and

wft inal (k) ≥ 0

(21)

k=1

This satisfies the convexity condition, guaranteeing that the
global model update ∆θt+1 remains within the convex hull
of the local update vectors. Theoretically, this prevents the
aggregation process from causing the model parameters to
diverge into an invalid space.
3) Hysteresis in Mode Switching: Beyond numerical stability, strategic stability is paramount. As described in Section
III-B, the framework incorporates a hysteresis mechanism for
switching between “Statistical Filtering” and “Contribution
Verification” modes. This design prevents the system from
oscillating (chattering) between distinct defense logics due to
minor loss fluctuations near the convergence threshold. Such
strategic stability ensures the continuity of the optimization
trajectory, facilitating a smooth transition into the convergence
phase.
VII. E XPERIMENTS
This section presents systematic experiments to verify the
effectiveness of the Secure-CHG framework against strategic
poisoning attacks. The core objectives are: 1) to verify the
“Late-stage Failure” defect of traditional defense mechanisms;
2) to verify the “Early-stage Vulnerability” of pure contribution evaluation mechanisms; and 3) to demonstrate the
robustness of the proposed hybrid framework (Secure-CHG)
throughout the entire training lifecycle.
A. Experimental Setup and Baselines
Experiments were conducted on the CIFAR-10 dataset using
the LeNet model, simulating a Federated Learning scenario
with 10 clients (including 2 malicious clients performing “dog
→ cat” label-flipping attacks). The EMA decay factor β in

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

12

70

60

50

ACC

FL-Defender was set to 0.8, and β for long-term reputation
updates was set to 0.9.
We established comprehensive baselines, including:
• No Defense: FedAvg.
• Traditional Statistical Defenses: FedMedian, TrimmedMean, MultiKrum, FLTrust.
• Ablation
Baselines: Pure contribution evaluation
(Only CHG)
and
statistical
filtering
only
(Only series filters).
The core evaluation metrics, all computed as averages over
the final 30 rounds, are:
• Average Global Model Accuracy (Avg. All-Acc): Measures the final generalization performance.
• Average Attack Success Rate (Avg. ASR): The primary
indicator of defense robustness (lower is better).
• Average Source Category Accuracy (Avg. Src-Acc):
The proportion of correctly classified samples from attacked source categories.

40

30
FedAvg
FedMedian
TrimmedMean
MultiKrum
FLTrust
Krum_CHG
Secure_CHG

20

10
0

10

20

30

40

50

epoch

Fig. 4. Trend of Main Task Accuracy (ACC) over training epochs.

70

B. Results and Analysis
60

50

40

Src-Acc

This section details the analysis of the experimental data
to systematically verify the core arguments of this paper.
All performance metrics are average values from the late
training stage (Rounds 21-50) to evaluate final robustness and
performance during the convergence phase.

30

20

TABLE II
P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON OF D IFFERENT D EFENSE M ECHANISMS
(L ATE S TAGE AVG .)

10
FedAvg
FedMedian
TrimmedMean
MultiKrum
FLTrust
Krum_CHG
Secure_CHG

0

Method

Avg. All-Acc (%)

Avg. Src-Acc (%)

Avg. ASR (%)

60.45
60.45
62.35
61.14
62.40
52.62
61.29
60.50
61.25

19.52
28.03
31.28
27.56
19.91
0.01
35.79
49.87
48.20

47.12
34.82
37.80
41.97
50.84
67.31
33.06
18.84
20.82

FedAvg
FedMedian
TrimmedMean
MultiKrum
FLTrust
Only CHG
Only series filters
Filter CHG (Secure-CHG, ours)
Krum CHG

−10
0

60

ASR

50
40
30
20
FedAvg
FedMedian
TrimmedMean
MultiKrum
FLTrust
Krum_CHG
Secure_CHG

−10
0

10

20

30

40

30

40

50

Fig. 5. Trend of Source Class Accuracy (Src-Acc) over training epochs.

70

0

20

epoch

80

10

10

50

epoch

Fig. 3. Trend of Attack Success Rate (ASR) over training epochs.

First, traditional statistical defenses universally suffer from
“Late-stage Failure.” As shown in Fig. 3 and Table II, in

the late training stages, the ASR curves of methods like
MultiKrum exhibit significant fluctuations or even rebounds.
Its final Avg. ASR (41.97%) shows limited improvement
compared to the undefended baseline A FedAvg (47.12%).
This confirms that when the model converges and update
vectors tend to be identical, defense mechanisms relying on
statistical morphology tend to fail.
To visually verify the gradient evolution laws described in
Definition 1 (Section III-A) and demonstrate the discriminative
ability of Secure-CHG in feature space, we utilized the t-SNE
technique to map high-dimensional model update vectors to
a 2D plane. Fig. 9 displays the distribution of benign clients
(blue circles) and malicious clients (red triangles) at different
training stages.
As shown in Fig. 9, the visual evolution of the feature
space intuitively reveals the efficacy boundaries of defense
mechanisms. In the early stage (Round 5, Fig. 9(a)), malicious
updates manifest as significant Statistical Outliers due to
drastic perturbations, creating a clear linear decision boundary
with benign nodes. However, as the model enters the convergence period (Round 45, Fig. 9(b)), benign gradients decay

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

13

80
70
60
50

ASR

toward random noise, and attackers exploit this to simulate
mainstream directions. This leads to a High Overlap where
malicious nodes penetrate benign clusters, proving that defenses relying purely on geometric morphology fail completely
at this stage.
Addressing this dilemma, Fig. 9(c) shows feature reconstruction after introducing Secure-CHG. Despite morphological convergence, malicious samples exhibit higher hardness
(Loss) due to the conflict between the “poisoning task” and
the “main task.” This Semantic Discrepancy, amplified by the
CHG mapping (hk ∇f (θ)), effectively isolates malicious nodes
from benign clusters. This strongly proves that Secure-CHG
can break through geometric camouflage limits and restore
linear separability in the late convergence stage.

40
30
20
10
0

Only_CHG
Only_series_filters
Secure_CHG

−10
0

10

20

30

40

50

epoch

C. Ablation Studies
To explicitly elucidate the individual contribution of each
module, we constructed ablation studies featuring two variants:
Only CHG (which solely relies on CHG-Shapley for contribution evaluation prior to aggregation) and Only series filters
(which exclusively employs FL-Defender for filtering, followed by naive FedAvg aggregation).
100000
52000
51900
51800
51700
51600
51500
51400
51300

80000

CHG-Score

60000

C0
C1

46.85 46.90 46.95 47.00 47.05 47.10 47.15
40000

20000

C0_Malware
C1_Malware
C2_contrib
C3_contrib
C4_contrib
C5_contrib
C6_contrib
C7_contrib
C8_contrib
C9_contrib

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

epoch

Fig. 6. Trend of CHG contribution values over time for Only CHG.

5000
3710
3700
3690
3680
3670
3660
3650
3640

4000

CHG-Score

3000

C1

43.9

44.0

44.1

44.2

2000

1000

C0_Malware
C1_Malware
C2_contrib
C3_contrib
C4_contrib
C5_contrib
C6_contrib
C7_contrib
C8_contrib
C9_contrib

0

10

First, relying solely on contribution evaluation (Only CHG)
exposes a critical weakness during the early stages. As depicted in Fig. 6, without early constraints, malicious clients
successfully hijack the initial training phase to accumulate erroneously high contribution scores, culminating in a
67.31% ASR (Fig. 8). Second, standalone cascaded filtering
(Only series filters) exhibits severe late-stage ASR instability
(33.06% ASR), empirically confirming the “Late-stage Failure” dilemma.
In contrast, the proposed Secure-CHG framework dynamically orchestrates two orthogonal defenses to circumvent this
dual dilemma, achieving a consistently low ASR of 18.84%.
A direct comparison between Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 distinctly
illuminates the mechanism behind this success. During early
training, morphology-based statistical defenses (e.g., the FLDefender filter in Section IV-B) intercept anomalous updates.
Crucially, this early-stage intervention effectively prevents
attackers from accumulating unwarranted trust; consequently,
the late-stage contribution scores of malicious nodes are fundamentally suppressed (Fig. 7). Post-convergence, the CHG
trust mechanism (Section V) precisely isolates the remaining
disguised adversaries via “hardness” divergence (malicious
hardness remains high while benign approaches zero). Concurrently, Secure-CHG yields an Avg. All-Acc of 60.50%,
demonstrating that it deeply suppresses hard-to-detect adversaries while well-preserving global model utility.

C0

43.8

0

Fig. 8. ASR trends for ablation study comparisons.

20

30

40

epoch

Fig. 7. Trend of CHG contribution values over time for Secure CHG.

50

D. Generalization Verification
To evaluate the generalization capability of the Secure-CHG
framework, we conducted comparative experiments across
three different dataset and model architecture scenarios:
1) MedMNIST with MedMNIST-Net (Medical Image
Classification).
2) CIFAR-10 with LeNet (Natural Image Classification).
3) NEU Surface Defect Database (NEU-SDDB) with
ResNet18 (Industrial Defect Detection), using bidirectional label flipping (Source ↔ Target).
The results are summarized in Table III.
Results show that Secure-CHG consistently achieves best or
near-best performance in ASR. Specifically, in the MedMNIST

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

(a) Early stage separability

14

(b) Late stage collapse under raw gradients

(c) Late stage separability restoration under Secure-CHG space

Fig. 9. Visualization of feature space evolution using t-SNE.
TABLE III
G ENERALIZATION P ERFORMANCE ACROSS D IFFERENT DATASETS AND M ODELS

FedAvg

FedMedian

TrimmedMean

MultiKrum

FLTrust

Krum CHG

Secure-CHG (ours)

MedMNIST /
MedMNIST-Net

Acc
SrcAcc
ASR

77.66
32.84
9.47

73.05
35.47
10.47

73.96
33.46
10.43

78.70
56.12
9.44

77.36
37.25
10.49

77.72
57.04
10.38

78.91
60.93
8.88

CIFAR-10 /
LeNet

Acc
SrcAcc
ASR

60.45
19.52
47.12

60.45
28.03
34.82

62.35
31.28
37.80

61.14
27.56
41.97

62.40
19.91
50.84

61.25
48.20
20.82

60.50
49.87
18.84

NEU-SDDB /
ResNet18

Acc
SrcAcc
ASR

35.80
37.25
40.83

56.02
83.28
31.52

50.56
86.81
42.75

36.37
82.21
46.00

39.24
27.16
58.85

28.72
81.37
53.89

52.44
69.80
24.88

task, it achieved the lowest ASR (8.88%) and highest accuracy.
In the CIFAR-10 scenario, its ASR (18.84%) substantially
outperforms traditional methods like MultiKrum.
Notably, on the challenging NEU-SDDB dataset with bidirectional flipping, the framework suppressed ASR to 24.88%
while maintaining high main task accuracy, demonstrating
strong adaptability to different distributions and data characteristics.

FedAvg
Secure-CHG
TrimmedMean
RFA
FoolsGold

100

80

60

ASR

Dataset / Model

40

20

0

E. Defense Against Advanced Threats: Backdoor Attacks

0

To evaluate robustness against backdoor attacks, we simulate a scenario where malicious clients injected a 3 × 3
pixel trigger into training data and mislabeled them to a
specific target class. We compared FedAvg, Secure-CHG,
TrimmedMean, RFA, and FoolsGold over 80 rounds.

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

epoch

Fig. 10. ASR trend under Backdoor Attack.

FedAvg
Secure-CHG
TrimmedMean
RFA
FoolsGold

50

TABLE IV
ROBUSTNESS AGAINST BACKDOOR ATTACKS (ROUNDS 31-80 AVG .)
Metric

FedAvg

Secure-CHG (ours)

TrimmedMean

RFA

FoolsGold

ASR (%)
MTA (%)

23.43
43.29

9.38
48.28

20.27
44.72

22.60
45.14

23.01
43.59

MTA

40

30

20

Experimental results (Table IV, Fig. 10, Fig. 11) demonstrate Secure-CHG’s superior defense. It suppresses backdoor
ASR to a very low level of 9.38%, substantially outperforming TrimmedMean (20.27%) and FoolsGold (23.01%),
while maintaining a higher MTA(Main Task Accuracy) of
48.28%. This demonstrates that the hybrid defense mechanism

10

0

10

20

30

40

epoch

Fig. 11. MTA trend under Backdoor Attack.

50

60

70

80

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

is robust against stealthy backdoor attacks, as the CHGShapley mechanism accurately captures persistent anomalies
exposed by the conflict between the poisoning task and the
main task.
VIII. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORKS
A. Conclusion
Federated Learning (FL) currently faces a “dual dilemma”
regarding security and fairness in real-world deployment. The
first challenge is the Late-stage Failure of security mechanisms, where traditional defenses relying on statistical morphology (e.g., Euclidean distance, Cosine similarity) inevitably
collapse as model updates converge and benign/malicious gradients homogenize. The second is the Shapley Value Paradox
in fairness assessment, where the theoretical gold standard
becomes impractical due to exponential computational complexity (O(2n )) and reliance on external proxy data.
To systematically address these challenges, this paper proposes Secure-CHG. The key innovation lies in a paradigm
shift from “Morphological Detection” based on superficial
statistics to “Contribution Verification” based on intrinsic
value. We show that even when geometric features collapse,
malicious clients maintain a high “Hardness” due to the
conflict between poisoning tasks and the main task, making
them distinguishable in the contribution dimension.
Key contributions of this framework include:
• Dual-Layer Hybrid Defense Architecture: We design a
dynamic defense lifecycle that utilizes statistical filtering
to mitigate early-stage volatility and adaptively switches
to contribution verification upon convergence to resolve
late-stage failure.
• Efficient CHG-Shapley Evaluation: By deriving a
closed-form solution for the “Hardness-Gradient” utility
function, we reduce computational complexity from exponential to constant time (O(1)), eliminating the need
for model retraining or proxy data.
• Endogenous Governance Loop: The framework unifies
defense, evaluation, and incentives, transforming contribution scores into dynamic aggregation weights, forming
a self-purifying ecosystem.
Extensive experiments demonstrate the superior robustness
of Secure-CHG. Against label-flipping attacks on CIFAR-10, it
maintains a low Attack Success Rate (ASR) of 18.84%, significantly outperforming the MultiKrum baseline (41.97%).Furthermore, against stealthy Backdoor Attacks, it suppresses
ASR to 9.38%. Generalization tests on MedMNIST and NEUSDDB further confirm its general effectiveness in overcoming
late-stage failure.
B. Future Works
Although Secure-CHG demonstrates significant advantages, optimizing for extreme data heterogeneity remains
a key challenge. Future research within Non-IID environments will primarily focus on three directions: First, introducing distribution-aware hardness calibration (e.g., via
lightweight global priors or clustering) to distinguish “honest

15

hard samples” from malicious anomalies, thereby preserving
fairness for long-tail data holders. Second, extending the
framework to Personalized Federated Learning (pFL) by
adapting CHG-Shapley to assess marginal contributions to
specific communities or personalized layers, constructing a
more inclusive trust network that rewards unique local contributions. Finally, exploring privacy-enhanced contribution
verification through the integration of Zero-Knowledge Proofs
(ZKP) or Secure Multi-Party Computation (SMPC), enabling
clients to prove the validity of their contributions without
exposing raw distribution data under strict privacy constraints.
R EFERENCES
[1] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A.
y Arcas, “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from
decentralized data,” in Artificial intelligence and statistics. Pmlr, 2017,
pp. 1273–1282. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v54/
mcmahan17a
[2] H. Zhu, J. Xu, S. Liu, and Y. Jin, “Federated learning on noniid data: A survey,” Neurocomputing, vol. 465, pp. 371–390, 2021,
doi:10.1016/j.neucom.2021.07.098.
[3] E. Bagdasaryan, A. Veit, Y. Hua, D. Estrin, and V. Shmatikov, “How to
backdoor federated learning,” in International conference on artificial
intelligence and statistics. PMLR, 2020, pp. 2938–2948. [Online].
Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v108/bagdasaryan20a
[4] V. Tolpegin, S. Truex, M. E. Gursoy, and L. Liu, “Data poisoning attacks
against federated learning systems,” in European symposium on research
in computer security. Springer, 2020, pp. 480–501. [Online]. Available:
https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-58951-6 24
[5] V. Shejwalkar and A. Houmansadr, “Manipulating the byzantine:
Optimizing model poisoning attacks and defenses for federated
learning,” in Proceedings of the 2021 Network and Distributed
System Security Symposium (NDSS), 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://par.nsf.gov/servlets/purl/10286354
[6] P. Blanchard, E. M. El Mhamdi, R. Guerraoui, and J. Stainer, “Machine learning with adversaries: Byzantine tolerant gradient descent,”
Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017,
doi:10.48550/arXiv.1703.02757.
[7] D. Yin, Y. Chen, R. Kannan, and P. Bartlett, “Byzantine-robust
distributed learning: Towards optimal statistical rates,” in International
conference on machine learning. Pmlr, 2018, pp. 5650–5659. [Online].
Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/yin18a
[8] N. M. Jebreel and J. Domingo-Ferrer, “Fl-defender: Combating targeted
attacks in federated learning,” Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 260, p.
110178, 2023, doi:10.1016/j.knosys.2022.110178.
[9] K. Pillutla, S. M. Kakade, and Z. Harchaoui, “Robust aggregation for
federated learning,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 70,
pp. 1142–1154, 2022, doi:10.1109/TSP.2022.3153135.
[10] A. E. Samy and Š. Girdzijauskas, “Mitigating sybil attacks in federated
learning,” in International Conference on Information Security Practice
and Experience. Springer, 2023, pp. 36–51, doi:10.1007/978-981-997032-2 3.
[11] X. Cao, M. Fang, J. Liu, and N. Z. Gong, “Fltrust: Byzantinerobust federated learning via trust bootstrapping,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2012.13995, 2020, doi:10.48550/arXiv.2012.13995.
[12] S. Yan, J. Du, Z. Xue, and A. Li, “Byzantine-robust aggregation
for federated learning with reinforcement learning,” in Asia-Pacific
Web (APWeb) and Web-Age Information Management (WAIM) Joint
International Conference on Web and Big Data. Springer, 2024, pp.
152–166, doi:10.1007/978-981-97-7241-4 10.
[13] T. Li, H. Li, Y. Pan, T. Xu, Z. Zheng, and Q. Zhu, “Meta
stackelberg game: Robust federated learning against adaptive and
mixed poisoning attacks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.17431, 2024,
doi:10.48550/arXiv.2410.17431.
[14] X. Zhang, X. Chen, M. Hong, Z. S. Wu, and J. Yi, “Understanding
clipping for federated learning: Convergence and client-level differential
privacy,” in International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2022,
2022. [Online]. Available: https://par.nsf.gov/servlets/purl/10395073
[15] Y. WANG, Q. ZHANG, W. QIU, Z. CHAI, S. GAO, J. ZHU, Y. TONG,
and Z. ZHENG, “Adaptive byzantine-robust differentially private federated learning,” SCIENTIA SINICA Informationis, vol. 55, no. 11, p.
2663, 2025, doi:10.1360/SSI-2025-0232.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021

[16] R. Xue, K. Xue, B. Zhu, X. Luo, T. Zhang, Q. Sun, and J. Lu, “Differentially private federated learning with an adaptive noise mechanism,”
IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 19, pp.
74–87, 2023, doi:10.1109/TIFS.2023.3318944.
[17] Y. Li, L. Fu, T. Wang, J. Lou, B. Chen, L. Yang, J. Shen, Z. Zheng, and
C. Chen, “Clients collaborate: Flexible differentially private federated
learning with guaranteed improvement of utility-privacy trade-off,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.07002, 2024, doi:10.48550/arXiv.2402.07002.
[18] X. Luo and B. Tang, “Byzantine fault-tolerant federated learning based
on trustworthy data and historical information,” Electronics, vol. 13,
no. 8, p. 1540, 2024, doi:10.3390/electronics13081540.
[19] P. Sun, X. Liu, Z. Wang, and B. Liu, “Byzantine-robust
decentralized federated learning via dual-domain clustering and trust
bootstrapping,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, 2024, pp. 24 756–24 765.
[Online]. Available: https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/CVPR2024/
html/Sun Byzantine-robust Decentralized Federated Learning via
Dual-domain Clustering and Trust Bootstrapping CVPR 2024
paper.html
[20] S. Feng, L. Gao, and L. Shi, “Cgfl: A robust federated learning approach
for intrusion detection systems based on data generation,” Applied
Sciences, vol. 15, no. 5, p. 2416, 2025, doi:10.3390/app15052416.
[21] U. Zafar, A. Teixeira, S. Toor et al., “Robust federated learning against
poisoning attacks: a gan-based defense framework,” arXiv e-prints, pp.
arXiv–2503, 2025, doi:arXiv.2503.20884.
[22] G. Wang, C. X. Dang, and Z. Zhou, “Measure contribution of participants in federated learning,” in 2019 IEEE international conference on big data (Big Data).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 2597–2604,
doi:10.1109/BigData47090.2019.9006179.
[23] J. Wang, L. Zhang, A. Li, X. You, and H. Cheng, “Efficient participant
contribution evaluation for horizontal and vertical federated learning,” in
2022 IEEE 38th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE).
IEEE, 2022, pp. 911–923, doi:10.1109/ICDE53745.2022.00073.
[24] L. S. Shapley, “A value for n-person games,” 1953. [Online]. Available:
https://www.torrossa.com/en/resources/an/5641636#page=87
[25] J. Zhao, X. Zhu, J. Wang, and J. Xiao, “Efficient client contribution evaluation for horizontal federated learning,” in ICASSP
2021-2021 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing (ICASSP).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 3060–3064,
doi:10.1109/ICASSP39728.2021.9413377.
[26] Z. Liu, Y. Chen, H. Yu, Y. Liu, and L. Cui, “Gtg-shapley: Efficient
and accurate participant contribution evaluation in federated learning,”
ACM Transactions on intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST), vol. 13,
no. 4, pp. 1–21, 2022, doi:10.1145/3501811.
[27] W. Gao, G. Xu, and X. Meng, “Fedcon: Scalable and efficient federated
learning via contribution-based aggregation,” Electronics, vol. 14, no. 5,
p. 1024, 2025, doi:10.3390/electronics14051024.
[28] H. Cai, “Chg shapley: Efficient data valuation and selection towards
trustworthy machine learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11730, 2024,
doi:10.48550/arXiv.2406.11730.
[29] H. Zhang, T. Wu, S. Cheng, and J. Liu, “Fedcos: A scene-adaptive
enhancement for federated learning,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 4545–4556, 2022, doi:10.1109/JIOT.2022.3218315.
[30] X. Zhang, M. Yao, Q. Guo, S. Qi, Y. Han, Y. Yang, Y. Qi, and Y. Qiao,
“Layer-wise contribution evaluation for incentivizing personalization in
federated learning,” in ICASSP 2026-2026 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE,
2026, pp. 3931–3935, doi:10.1109/ICASSP55912.2026.11460410.
[31] C. Xie, S. Koyejo, and I. Gupta, “Zeno: Distributed stochastic
gradient descent with suspicion-based fault-tolerance,” in International
conference on machine learning. PMLR, 2019, pp. 6893–6901.
[Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/xie19b.html
[32] N. Tastan, S. Fares, T. Aremu, S. Horvath, and K. Nandakumar,
“Redefining contributions: Shapley-driven federated learning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2406.00569, 2024, doi:10.48550/arXiv.2406.00569.
[33] P. A. Apellániz, J. Parras, and S. Zazo, “Improving synthetic data
generation through federated learning in scarce and heterogeneous data
scenarios,” Big Data and Cognitive Computing, vol. 9, no. 2, p. 18,
2025, doi:10.3390/bdcc9020018.
[34] H. W. Lim, S. Y. Tanjung, I. Iwan, B. N. Yahya, and S.-L. Lee,
“Fedeach: Federated learning with evaluator-based incentive mechanism
for human activity recognition,” Sensors, vol. 25, no. 12, p. 3687, 2025,
doi:10.3390/s25123687.
[35] X. Lyu, Y. Han, W. Wang, J. Liu, B. Wang, K. Chen, Y. Li,
J. Liu, and X. Zhang, “Coba: Collusive backdoor attacks with optimized trigger to federated learning,” IEEE Transactions on Depend-

16

able and Secure Computing, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 1506–1518, 2024,
doi:10.1109/TDSC.2024.3445637.
[36] A. Ghorbani and J. Zou, “Data shapley: Equitable valuation
of data for machine learning,” in International conference on
machine learning. PMLR, 2019, pp. 2242–2251. [Online]. Available:
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/ghorbani19c.html

Guanming Che is currently pursuing a B.S. degree
in information security with the Software College,
Northeastern University, Shenyang, China. His research interests include network security and federated learning.

Qiang Wang received the M.S. degree in information security and the Ph.D. degree in software engineering from Northeastern University, Shenyang,
China, in 2016 and 2020, respectively. He is currently an associate Professor at Northeastern University, Shenyang, China. His research interests include verifiable computation and secure multi-party
computation.

Jian Xu received the Ph.D. degree in computer application technology from Northeastern University,
Shenyang, China, in 2013. He is currently a Professor and Doctoral Supervisor of Software College
in Northeastern University. His research interests
include cryptography and network security.

Fucai Zhou received the Ph.D. degree of Computer
Software and Theory at Northeastern University,
Shenyang, China, in 2001. He is currently a Professor and Doctoral Supervisor of Software College in Northeastern University. His research interests include cryptography, network security, trusted
computing, secure cloud storage, software security,
basic theory and critical technology in electronic
commerce.

